



Chapter 1





“Welcome home, Master Macgregor. The name’s Madeline Ramsey, manager o’ this fine establishment.”

Angus was greeted by a short, plump, middle-aged woman with kind brown eyes and hair the colour of fire. As she shook his hand, she regarded Angus with an openness he hadn’t anticipated. Given the circumstances which surrounded his presence at Clan Gregor Castle, he’d half expected to be treated as an interloper.

“Nice to meet you, Madeline.” Pain surged in the back of his throat, but he managed to swallow it down. The only reason he was there was because he’d lost people near and dear to him. He’d have given anything for the situation to be different.

Angus dragged his suitcase behind him and set it down in the middle of the large foyer, taking in his surroundings while he fought a looming yawn. The flight halfway around the world had been long and uncomfortable, but the excitement of inheriting an actual Scottish castle had kept him more than wide awake.

Certain the second his head hit the pillow he wouldn’t surface for several long hours, perhaps days, the plan was to enjoy every moment he could before jetlag took hold. Angus Macgregor had never ventured this far from his family home in eastern Sydney before. Since discovering his uncle, William Macgregor III, had passed the week previous, his mundane existence had become an absolute whirlwind.

“Please, call me Maddie.”

“Only if you call me Angus.” He winked at Maddie, and she giggled in a light, lilting manner.

“Right enough, Angus.” Her laughter subsided, leaving behind a broad, toothy grin. Angus couldn’t stop himself from smiling back. “Now, why don’t we see ye to yer accommodations and leave the grand tour till morning? Ye must be pure done in after such a long flight.”

“That’d be great.” Angus would never grow tired of the way people spoke in this part of the world, his twangy Australian accent grating compared to the thick Scottish brogue he’d been listening to since touching down in Glasgow. It was something he’d missed hearing on a daily basis these past few months.

The foyer with its high, church-like domed ceilings and intricately carved decorative cornices was luxurious enough, but when Maddie showed Angus to his uncle’s quarters, he was blown away. Located at the end of a long hallway on the ground floor, the room was nothing like the modest lodgings Angus had imagined. Complete with antique furnishings, a sandstone fireplace, and red and gold wallpaper with matching velvet drapery surrounding a huge, etched glass window, the room screamed opulence. Then there was the ornate crystal chandelier which hung above the king-sized four-poster bed carved from the darkest of timbers. So grand was the bed, he felt tempted to curl up and sleep on the small antique loveseat at its foot instead.

Setting his suitcase on said loveseat, Angus heaved a weary sigh as he began to unpack and put his belongings away. While he worked, he reflected, staring misty-eyed at the large portrait of William that hung above the mantelpiece. He loved his uncle more than anything, even though they’d never had the opportunity to meet. Losing his mother to breast cancer at the age of three, then his father more recently to Motor Neurone Disease, had left Angus with no family in the world, apart from a man he’d never known existed until recently.

Angus’s father, Thomas, had decided it was time to reveal he had an older brother a few days before he’d lost the ability to communicate. Thomas hadn’t spoken to William since he was a young man, when he’d married his childhood sweetheart and left Scotland behind to begin a new life in Sydney.

A few weeks after his confession, Thomas had passed. It was then Angus made the decision to track William down in order to break the bad news. Due to a heart condition, William hadn’t been well enough to make the trip to Sydney to attend his brother’s funeral, but he’d been thrilled to hear from his nephew just the same.

Since then, the two of them corresponded at length, and Angus got to know the brusque yet intriguing uncle of his. At first, Angus hadn’t quite known how to react when William had told him the reason why the two brothers hadn’t kept in touch was because he’d carried a torch for Elizabeth, Angus’s mother, for many a year. Still, Angus hadn’t been able to help but connect with his one remaining family member; the conversations they’d shared having gotten him through some of the darkest days of his existence.

After receiving a phone call from a stranger who’d proceeded to inform him William had suffered a massive heart attack and passed in his sleep, never had Angus felt more alone. William had no other family, had never married nor had children; his love for Elizabeth so profound, it had become apparent that nobody else could hold a candle to her.

Discovering William was gone was shock enough, but when Angus then learned he’d been bequeathed the entire estate as well as a tidy sum of money, it had set him reeling. Even at this very moment as he slid his empty suitcase under the bed, shed his clothes, and flopped on the cream vintage bedspread, he couldn’t quite believe what had come to pass.

With an all-encompassing ache which started in his throat and spread throughout his chest, Angus slipped beneath the covers, drew in a heavy breath, and closed his eyes.





Chapter 2





Stretching his tired limbs, Angus rolled over and glanced out the window, the morning light muted as a fog blanketed the entire estate. Groaning, he rubbed his bleary eyes. He felt so bone-tired he could have slept for a century, but he’d need to snap himself out of this state of exhaustion if he wanted to make the most of his day. Unfortunately for Angus, his body clock begged to differ. It was so out of whack he’d spent the better part of the night waking at every little sound. When he’d managed to get some sleep, his head had been filled with the strangest of dreams, the fragments he recollected both thrilling and disturbing. He knew that dreams were nothing more than a manifestation of one’s conscious and subconscious thought, but visions of a shadowy figure floating toward him had still troubled Angus well enough.

According to what his uncle had told him, the spirit who was said to have roamed the estate had remained silent over the past few decades or so. Not that the possible existence of ghosts perturbed Angus one little bit. Being the rational, practical man he was, he didn’t believe in anything unless he saw it with his own eyes.

Every muscle protested as Angus forced himself to climb out of bed, and he shivered as the cold morning air hit his sleep-warm skin. With a wide yawn, he arched his back and ran a hand down the smattering of dark, coarse hairs on his chest before scratching the neatly trimmed thatch of bush surrounding his morning wood. Realising his bladder was about to burst, Angus grabbed the white towelling robe Maddie had graciously hung on the back of the door and headed for the ensuite.

A large claw-foot tub, along with several tiny bottles of creams, oils, and gels greeted him, and he draped the robe over the vanity, took a quick piss then shaved while the tub filled. The scent of pine wafted around the room when he added a few squirts of dark green goop to the water, and Angus let out a tiny snort. Truth be told, he was more of a shower man, the bath yet another reminder he was a long way from the place he’d not all that long ago called home. Sinking into the near-scalding liquid, Angus closed his eyes and let out a satisfied sigh. Today was going to be the first day of the rest of his life.



As though fire had turned to ice, the steamy air became a fog so thick, it threatened to swallow Angus whole. His lungs ached and body convulsed as he inhaled the bitter cold, nipples hardening and skin turning to gooseflesh while a flurry began to swirl around him. The deeper he breathed in the frigid air, the more violent the storm became. Terror spiked within when he felt a heaviness threaten to crush him, rendering him unable to move or speak. Heart pounding, he tried to escape the manacles which bound him tight, but was powerless to do anything but give in to the sensations coursing through him. Every emotion he had ever felt, along with a few new ones, lay raw and exposed like a jangling nerve. It was then he saw the face of a man so handsome, so hauntingly mesmerising, that it took his breath away.

With a strangled gasp, Angus took in the man’s every feature: long, flowing, raven hair, porcelain skin, and the most startling emerald green eyes he had ever seen. All at once, the fight Angus had moments before melted away. In its place was a desire so strong he felt that somehow, as incredible as it seemed, his world had been set to rights.

“Ma sweet, beautiful lad. Ye’ve returned to me at long last.”

Once those words left the man’s blood-red lips, lust rose from deep within Angus and rushed toward his shaft. An intoxicating, herbal scent surrounded him while the man’s voice, so deep and gruff—and distinctly Scottish—captivated him. There was only one thing Angus wanted in that moment… to feel the delicious stretch of a cock deep inside him. If it weren’t for a loud banging noise tugging at the corners of his consciousness, Angus sensed he could have gotten his wish...



“Hello?”

Angus’s eyes flew open in response to the sound of the unfamiliar voice, the loud thump as a fist pounded on the door only adding to his confusion. Startled, he sat up, the sudden movement causing a good portion of the cooled water to slosh over the edge of the tub and hit the floor.

“Are ye all right in there?”

“Oh. Yes. Be right out!” Angus shouted, coming close to slipping on the wet tile as he clambered out of the bath. Cold and disoriented, he grabbed a towel and dried off with haste before donning the robe and letting the water out.

How long was I asleep in that tub? And what was with the unmistakable feeling of euphoria, along with that familiar, post-orgasmic throb in his cock and arse?

Rushing to open the door, Angus was about to snap at whomever had awoken him from the most vivid wet dream he’d had in living memory, until he took in the sight before him.

Tall and solidly built, the man wore a white, open-necked shirt, while his large, muscular legs were accentuated by a knee-length red and black kilt. The heavy leather boots he wore, laces done up in a haphazard manner, were scuffed and worn.

Mmm. Wonder if what they say about kilts and no underwear is true?

His angular, handsome face and wild-looking, shoulder-length auburn hair along with a day’s worth of stubble completed the look of a living, breathing Highlander. He smelled good, too... the way Angus imagined the forest would after a rainstorm. He couldn’t help but breathe the man in.

As if possessing the ability to read Angus’s innermost thoughts, the Scot’s cheeks were set aflame, the hue so deep against his pale skin it was as though the sun had kissed it a thousand times. Courtesy of his dream, Angus’s balls had already been drained dry, but that didn’t stop his cock from stirring.

“The name’s Daniel Ramsey.” Light brown eyes filled with uncertainty darted about before they met with Angus’s.

“Angus Macgregor. It’s nice to meet you.” Angus reached out to shake Daniel’s hand, and the moment the Scot’s fingers gripped his, a surge of desire unlike anything he’d known before flowed through him.

William had mentioned Daniel’s name in passing, but hadn’t divulged too many details aside from the fact he was Maddie’s nephew. Now the man himself was standing before him, larger than life, Angus wanted to know more.

Daniel took a step back and cleared his throat, the loss of contact jolting Angus from his thoughts. “Auntie got caught up with a tour bus that’s just arrived, so I’ve been instructed to come fetch ye for supper.”

Angus glanced at the small antique clock that sat on his bedside table, surprised to find it was close to six in the evening.

“Oh, shit. Sorry about that. I had no idea how late it was.” He gave Daniel the up and down once more before pointing at his kilt. “Um, do I have to wear, um... one of those?”

Daniel’s burst of laughter sounded nervous, while his cheeks continued to bloom bright with embarrassment. “A kilt? No’ unless ye feel the need. It’s just something we like to do on special occasions.”

Angus wondered if the occasion was him, one side of his mouth curving up at the thought. “Okay, then. Just give me a sec and I’ll be good to go.”

With a single nod, Daniel turned and stared out the window, strong looking arms folded across the breadth of his chest. Angus took the opportunity to ogle the man unnoticed, dressing in a pair of black jeans and pale blue polo shirt before giving his hair a quick brush. Fuck, but the Scot was built, cutting a formidable figure against the early evening sky. Smiling to himself, Angus sat on the edge of the bed and slipped on his socks and best pair of tan leather dress shoes.

“Ready when you are.” Angus stood, smile remaining plastered on his face.

Daniel turned and opened the bedroom door allowing Angus to pass, the hint of a smirk he sported making Angus wonder if he’d been checking Daniel out as subtly as he’d first thought.

Not a word was exchanged between the two men as they headed past reception and down a wide spiral staircase, but Angus didn’t mind. He was so preoccupied with the other man’s presence, he felt incapable of uttering a sound.

Wearing a broad smile, Maddie greeted them at the bottom of the stairs. “Weel now, don’t ye both look handsome.” With a cheeky wink, she tittered. “Daniel, my boy, please see to it that Chef has everything in order. And don’t be getting that kilt covered in gravy like ye did last time, y’hear?”

“Och woman, dinnae fash yersel’.” Daniel gave Maddie an exaggerated scowl then pressed a quick kiss to her cheek, giving Angus the briefest of smiles before disappearing through the kitchen door.

A chuckling Angus turned and took in the décor. He’d read that what was once a granary and dungeon had since been converted to a sumptuous dining hall, but the pictures he’d seen hadn’t done it justice. He doubted he’d ever get used to the grandeur which oozed from every square inch of this castle. Wooden carvings and oil paintings depicting everything from war to various landscapes graced the stone walls, while suits of armour and weaponry were dotted about the room. One large and two smaller chandeliers hung over several dining tables surrounded by high-backed antique chairs. Polished silverware, large candelabra, fine bone china, and pristine linen napkins as well as crystal decanters filled with red wine and water completed the look of days long gone.

“This place is awesome,” Angus stated in wide-eyed wonder.

“Oh, aye, that it is. So many memories, and such a long history, too. Now, come on, lad. We’ve guests to see to.” With a crook of her finger, Maddie beckoned Angus to follow.

Aside from a few families from Inverness and two sisters who’d driven up from London that morning, the latest arrivals comprising a large contingent of middle-aged Welsh tourists, made up the remainder of the guest list. Maddie conversed with each of them with practiced ease while Angus watched and learned. She asked about their travels and what plans they had for the remainder of their journey, then thanked them for choosing to stay at Clan Gregor Castle. Angus couldn’t contain his smile. There was no doubt he’d looked forward to filling the role as owner and proprietor of his uncle’s estate, but once he began to interact with the guests, asking questions as well as telling them a bit about himself, he felt like he’d slipped on a pair of old, comfortable shoes.

The two of them continued to work the room while dinner was served, the fare simple but delicious, and according to Maddie, all made from local produce. Angus stared at Daniel any chance he got, the quiet but affable Scot making sure all orders were placed and glasses were filled as he flitted between the dining hall and the kitchen. Whenever Daniel cast a glance Angus’s way, his pulse raced, while a nervous excitement formed in the pit of his stomach.

Angus’s musings were halted by the sound of breaking crockery coming from the direction of the sisters—both young and blonde, and both of them beautiful. The slightly older looking, more intoxicated of the two had knocked her bread-and-butter plate off the table. Wearing a lascivious smile, she eyed Daniel’s form as he crouched down and began to clean up the mess.

“He’s a bit of all right, eh, Lily?” She elbowed her sister in the ribs. “And with how built he is and the size of those feet? I’ll bet a hundred quid he’s just as big under that kilt,” she announced in an all too loud voice.

A look of mortification crossed Lily’s delicate features, cornflower blue eyes widening with each word her sister blurted. Angus stood by the kitchen door frozen in place, fists clenched and blood boiling over the woman’s comments.

“Shut up, Emma. You’re making a scene,” Lily admonished in a low, menacing tone, teeth clenched as she tried to calm her surly dinner companion as best she could. She glanced around the room and took a small sip of water.

“I am not,” Emma refuted with a slow roll of her eyes, voice growing even louder in volume. “I just know a good piece of man meat when I see it, and if this bunch of twats can’t appreciate that, they can bloody well sod off.”

With his back to the table and face red as a tomato, Daniel continued to focus on the task of picking up the last of the broken crockery. It was unfortunate for him that Emma hadn’t quite given up on her idea of catching the man’s attention, for the moment Daniel stood, she ran a hand up the back of his thigh, causing everything in his hands to crash to the floor again. That particular move spurred Angus into action, and without thought of the consequences, he stalked toward the table.

Before he was able to let fly with his thoughts on Emma’s inappropriate behaviour, Maddie was standing beside him, shaking her head and placing a calming hand on his bicep. Taking a few deep breaths, Angus picked up a decanter of water and forced a sickly-sweet smile.

“Is there anything else I can get you? More bread to help soak up the wine, perhaps?” he asked, filling her glass, tone sarcastic and teetering on the edge of rage.

Lily cupped a hand over her mouth and giggled.

“No bread, but since I’m feeling a bit tipsy, could I request that your waiter escort us back to our room? I don’t think I can make it up all those stairs on my own, and he looks so strong.” Emma attempted to bat her lashes at Daniel, but it came off looking more like she had something stuck in her eye.

Angus was outraged, but once he fixed his gaze on Daniel, his anger began to dissipate. Emma was no threat. Not with the incredulous, ‘not even if you were the last woman on earth’ look Daniel was giving her.

“Since yer waiter needs to clean up this mess before someone is injured, and since ye’ll both be leaving first thing in the morning, I think it’s best that I see ye back to yer room safe and sound,” Maddie interjected, clearly used to dealing with situations such as this.

Emma opened her mouth, no doubt to argue, but by then Maddie had helped her to her feet and spoken a few quiet words into her ear. After mumbling a slurred apology, Emma allowed Maddie to wrap a firm arm around her waist and pull her toward the exit. Staggering up the stairs, mortified sibling in tow, Emma muttered something about there being no decent men left in the world.

With a mouthed, ‘Thank you,’ and hesitant, red-faced smile directed toward Angus, Daniel finished cleaning up the mess before making a beeline for the kitchen.

Angus was tempted to go check on him, but couldn’t very well do that with several sets of eyes fixed on him and a dead silence filling the air.

“Bet you guys never thought you’d get dinner and a show, now, did ya?” he quipped with a broad grin and a sly wink. Waves of laughter and a clap or two echoed around the room before the guests began to talk amongst themselves once more.

Angus continued chatting and laughing until the last of the meals were served, but what had occurred between Emma and Daniel was never far from his thoughts. That led him to ponder whether the Scot wasn’t attracted to Emma in particular, or if any woman would be capable of catching his eye.

Not that he’d have the courage to find out. By the time Angus learned he preferred the company of cock, his father’s illness had progressed to the point where constant care was required. There would’ve been little point in coming out back then… not when the chance of meeting someone special was practically non-existent. Now Angus was free to do as he pleased, he hoped his life would change for the better.

The dining hall closed at nine, as it did every evening, and after they’d showed the remaining guests back to their lodgings, Angus, Maddie, and Daniel headed for the kitchen.

As they walked, they talked, Maddie giving Angus the general rundown when it came to mealtimes. Breakfast was always served buffet-style and comprised pastries, fried eggs, sausage, bacon, and black pudding, while lunch came in a basket filled with sandwiches, buttery-sweet shortbread, and flasks of piping hot tea. Guests were also invited to ride horseback and picnic on the grounds when the weather permitted. She then went on to tell him about the local markets and trips both near and far the guests might like to take, and how it was up to Angus or herself to make all the arrangements. Angus wondered if his head would explode as he tried to take in every last piece of information.

Seating themselves around a small table in the large, walk-in pantry, they tucked into a late dinner of leftover rare roast beef with mashed potatoes, peas, and lashings of dark, thick gravy. Chef and the rest of the kitchen staff had already gone home, but Maddie explained they would be returning early the next morning to prepare the day’s menu.

“Ye did very well today, young Angus Macgregor.” Maddie gave a nod of approval as she sliced off a small piece of pink, tender meat and popped it in her mouth.

“That he did, Auntie. That he did,” Daniel agreed, swallowing down a large portion of meat and potato, his appetite proving to be more than a match for his bulk.

“Thanks. It’s great getting to know people when they’re on holiday. Even the drunk ones.” Angus laughed. “I didn’t see much of that when I worked in IT.” His former career as a helpdesk consultant had never satisfied him. The job hadn’t been all bad, considering it more than covered his living expenses, but his heart had never been in it. Add to that the angry and frustrated clients who often came along with the territory, he’d learned quickly that kind of role wasn’t for him.

“It seems to me ye were yet to found yer calling, that’s all. William was so passionate about this place, and always made a point of treating everyone, staff and visitor alike as though they were family. The way ye spoke to everyone tonight, I’m sensing the apple doesnae fall far from the tree.” Maddie took another mouthful of food and chewed, her expression contemplative as she smiled a tiny smile.

“He really did love this place, didn’t he?” Angus stated in a solemn whisper, and Daniel nodded.

“Verra much. Did he tell ye about the ghost tours?” Daniel spoke in an equally soft voice, side-eyeing Angus.

“Yeah, but he also told me he saw no point in continuing them, considering it’s been years since the hauntings stopped.”

Maddie sighed. “Oh, aye. Has to be close to thirty gone now, I’d wager.”

She then spoke of William’s charity work, and of his endless commitment to the restoration of the castle. Filling in the moat, as it was on the verge of causing damage to the foundations, was one of the many projects William had undertaken over the years, every piece of brick and mortar he’d replaced done so with careful consideration. Angus listened with rapt attention, absorbing every new fact like a sponge. He expressed his sorrow when Maddie spoke of how she was the one who’d discovered William dead in his room, hand clutching a picture of Angus, a peaceful smile on his face. How William had talked about Angus as if he were the child he’d always wanted, and how he’d expressed his desire to have Angus with him on several occasions.

“I wish I could have met him.” His chest constricted, and he blinked back the tears which had gathered in the corners of his eyes. Sucking in a shaky breath, he took a sip of water, wishing more than anything it was three fingers of whiskey instead.

“Aye. William would be proud ye’re honouring his wishes. The Macgregor Clan built this place, and I for one would have been sad to see it go.”

“Oh, I agree, and just so the two of you know, it will be business as usual around here.” Of that fact, Angus was certain. Since discovering Clan Gregor Castle was part of his heritage, he’d die before he’d ever let it go.

“That’s good to hear, lad.” Maddie patted Angus on the back of his and gave him a relieved smile.

“‘Tis,” Daniel agreed, cheeks puffing as he blew out a large gush of air before he grinned so wide, it lit up his entire face.

The three of them sat together, reflecting in the still quiet of the evening while they finished their meal. After Maddie brought out some leftover bread and butter pudding, promising to show Angus the rest of the castle when they were done, Daniel told them he needed to get an early night so he could tend the horses first thing, and bid them goodnight.

Watching the plaid of Daniel’s kilt swing back and forth before he disappeared through the door, Angus missed the Scot the moment he was gone.





Chapter 3





After exploring all three levels of the castle, Angus and Maddie ended their tour in the foyer. The reception desk was every bit as grand as the rest of the furnishings, but Angus had to laugh when he caught sight of the antiquated computer with an equally ancient printer that sat on one corner of the dark polished timber, rotary phone and old fashioned register on the other. Maddie was perplexed by the young man’s reaction until he explained he couldn’t run a hotel bookings system on what could only be described as a dinosaur. In the next breath, he was promising to upgrade everything as a matter of priority.

Spotting the one remaining part of the castle he’d yet to see, Angus stuck his head through the doorway to the large cloakroom directly behind the reception desk.

“What’s in there?” He glanced at Maddie, then pointed at the unmarked timber door with a wrought iron latch located between the clothing racks at the far end of the room.

Maddie brushed past Angus and reached into her jacket pocket, then held up a set of antique keys. “William’s library. We make sure to keep the door locked at all times in case any guests happen to stray back here.”

“Why’s that? He got dead bodies stashed behind the shelves or something?” Angus barked out a laugh while Maddie picked out the largest key of the bunch and smiled, opening the door before switching on the light. Angus made his way inside, then feasted his eyes on the huge space. Floor to ceiling shelves filled with books dominated one side of the room, while next to a large fireplace was a desk and chair with a fountain pen resting on a green leather blotter, a brass lamp and the same old-fashioned phone as the one in reception. Beneath the large picture window sat a black, leather studded couch.

“No dead bodies far as I ken, but most of the books within this library are irreplaceable. It would have broken yer uncle’s heart if anything had happened to them.”

With a solemn nod, Angus moved across the room until he found himself staring at the monstrous, gilt-framed portrait which hung on the wall between the window and the hearth. It depicted a young, fair-haired woman with dark, piercing eyes and a pallid complexion. Next to her stood the most elegant looking man he’d ever seen. With skin the colour of clotted cream and wavy, chestnut hair that peeked from beneath a gold-trimmed black hat, he wore a kilt bearing the same red and green tartan as was on the woman’s dress. His fine features and high, flushed cheekbones were framed by stunning, light blue eyes. Angus had always thought himself rather plain, but couldn’t deny the striking resemblance he shared with the man in the portrait, so much so, it was as though he were looking into a mirror.

“Catriona and James Macgregor,” Angus whispered when his eyes set upon the brass plaque at the bottom of the frame. His middle name was James—the same as his ancestor. He smiled at the thought.

“Hard to believe they were twins, don’t ye think?” Maddie’s eyes darted between Angus and the painting, and widened. “How strange that ye look more like James than his sister did.”

“It is kind of uncanny,” Angus admitted, a shiver running up his spine while he continued to study the features of the young man.

“That it is. Now, where did I see... ah, here we go.” Maddie selected a worn, leather-bound volume. “I think ye might find this quite the interesting read.”

Angus’s eyes grew wide as he traced his fingers over the faint gold letters of the words written on the spine of the book she’d handed to him:

Clan Gregor — 1300-1350

“The story behind Catriona and James is in this volume.” She pointed at the shelves. “In fact, all yer family history up till the end of last century is along that row.”

“I’ll be sure to check it out. Thanks, Maddie.” Angus couldn’t wait to discover everything he could about his heritage.

“Ye’re more than welcome. Now, I’m going to lock up and turn in. Mine and Daniel’s lodgings are attached to the stables, so just pick up the phone and give us a wee tingle if ye need anything, all right?”

“Will do,” Angus answered with a firm nod, recollecting the grand sandstone and timber buildings he’d spotted upon his arrival.

With a warm smile, Maddie pulled out a second set of keys and handed them to Angus. He twirled the keyring around his index finger a couple of times before he pocketed the jangling metal.

“Now, don’t be tempted to stay in here all night. I’ll need ye up at six to help get breakfast in order, then if it’s a nice day, we might even show ye the rest o’ the estate.”

“Sounds good. And don’t worry, I won’t be long.”

With a twinkle in her eye, Maddie nodded, then turned and left, shutting the door behind her.

Alone at last, Angus settled into the couch and opened the book to the first page. Fascinating as the family history was, the hour was growing late, and he began to tire. But when he came upon the part about James and Catriona Macgregor, he couldn’t stop himself from reading on...



In the early 1330s, teenaged Lady Catriona Macgregor was betrothed to Finlay Grant, only to lose him in the battle of Leuchars Castle at St Andrew’s in 1335. After spending several years mourning Finlay’s death, Catriona met and fell in love with Alexander Ramsey, the man who had tried but failed to save the life of her betrothed.

Warden of the Middle Marches, and one of the Regent’s chief commanders at Boroughmuir where Guy de Namur, a Flemish ally of England was defeated, Alexander was present at the capture of Leuchars Castle. In June 1338 he also relieved at Dunbar Castle, assisting the Countess of Dunbar in her struggle to maintain a stronghold against the English.

Alexander and his party of men recaptured Roxburgh Castle from the English in 1342, after Sir Hamish had tried several times unsuccessfully to retake it. For his brave and heroic feat, Alexander was appointed constable of Roxburgh and Sheriff of Teviotdale. Sir Hamish also gave his blessing for the young man and Catriona to marry. Alexander agreed, and proposed soon after.

On the eve of his wedding, Alexander was caught attempting to seduce Catriona’s brother, James. So outraged was he by their betrayal, Sir Hamish murdered his only son, tossing his body in Loch Lomond before imprisoning Alexander in the dungeon of Gregor Castle where he was left to starve. Heartbroken by what had occurred, Catriona hanged herself in her quarters that very same night, while legend has it that Alexander survived for seventeen days by eating small quantities of grain that fell through the cracks in the floor of the castle granary above the dungeon. On the eighteenth day, he was taken to the village square and burned alive.



Closing the book, Angus glanced at the portrait, an unending sadness overwhelming him. The tragedy that was the life and death of his ancestors had moved him to tears.





Chapter 4





Learning what had occurred between his ancestors and Sir Alexander Ramsey had caused Angus’s mind to go into overdrive, the sleep he’d managed to get fitful at best. Add that to the dream he’d had, by far the most vivid, when the alarm had finally startled him awake, he felt as though he’d been hit by the proverbial Mack truck.

Two cups of coffee along with sausages and eggs for breakfast had helped Angus feel somewhat human again, but the dream had been so detailed in its complexity that he’d been incapable of ridding it from his thoughts.

In the dream, Angus wore the same tartan James had in his portrait, and found himself surrounded by an endless ocean of purple blooms as he stood in the middle of a beautiful glen. He’d marvelled as the gentle breeze turned everything into a palette of moving colour… breathed in deep as an earthy, herb-like scent filled the air, but as if a switch had been flipped, the sky had turned dark and angry while the flowers, once so full of life, had begun to wither and die. The next thing Angus had known, he’d been standing by the shores of a lake, a bone-chilling coldness and an unending feeling of sorrow pervading his every thought, the distinct stench of death and decay reminding him that he was gone.

Tired as Angus was, it was a glorious day, the spring sunshine warm against his skin as he strode across the thickets of lush grass. Once the guests had eaten then set off for a daytrip to Edinburgh, Maddie had handed Angus a brand new pair of black riding boots and khaki jodhpurs, instructing him to change and meet Daniel at the stables for the promised tour of the grounds.

Angus slid the stable door open and stepped inside, feeling raw and vulnerable when Daniel’s eyes began to traverse his body from head to toe.

“Weel, don’t ye look every part the horseman.”

“Don’t let this get-up fool you, mate. It’s been years since I’ve ridden,” Angus confessed, scrunching his nose at the pungent odour of manure and animal that filled the dusty air.

Daniel let out a hearty laugh and wandered toward the spacious stall where two horses munched on their breakfasts of hay. One of the animals was a pretty Bay with a black mane and tail, the other a pale grey and quite a lot larger.

Growing up in the suburbs of Sydney meant there had been little opportunity for Angus to go horse riding. The only times he had done so were when he was a boy; first in Centennial Park for a childhood friend’s tenth birthday, and again at his high school summer camp on the Hawkesbury River. On both occasions his mounts had been old nags, each preferring to graze rather than gallop, but these two animals appeared far livelier.

“I’m sure ye’ll do just fine, Angus.”

His heart stuttered at the seductive sound of Daniel saying his name for the first time. The Scot’s tone of voice, which had dropped a few octaves, was so damn sexy.

“Eh, it’ll be a good day if I don’t fall on my arse,” Angus joked, trying with all he had to keep the mood light by flashing a grin and giving a one-shouldered shrug.

“A verra good day,” Daniel agreed with a wicked glint in his eye.

Angus loved that Daniel was not only handsome, but also funny, and if he didn’t know better, he’d say the man was flirting with him. But even if Daniel were gay, was it worth risking everything to pursue him? It wasn’t as though the man didn’t look hot as hell in a black polo shirt, knee high tan boots, and white riding breeches, but they’d be working together. Anything beyond friendship between the two men would be out of the question. Wouldn’t it?

“What, no kilt today?” Angus was still trying, rather unsuccessfully, to distract himself from his thoughts.

Daniel burst out laughing. “I’ll admit that every now’n then I get the urge to bare ma bawbag to the saddle, but no’ today.”

Ah hell, now didn’t that admission conjure up some images in Angus’s head.

“Oh, my God. Seriously?” Mouth falling open, Angus watched Daniel pick up an old, worn saddle and haul it over the back of the grey horse.

“Dinnae knock it till ye try it.” With an unrepentant grin, Daniel secured everything in place, repeating the same process with the Bay. Once he’d slung a large backpack over his shoulders, he grabbed the reins and pulled, clicking his tongue and leading the animals outside. “That black one on the end there should fit ye fine.” Daniel jerked his chin toward a set of hooks on the back of the stable door where several helmets of varying sizes and colours hung.

“Aww, man. Are you trying to give me a bad case of helmet hair?” Angus groused, and Daniel threw his head back and guffawed.

“I’d rather ye had a bad hair day than no head at all. Yer horse Jezebel might be gentle as a lamb, but my boy Charlie here has a tendency to kick if anyone gets too close.” He stroked the withers of the grey horse in question, and Angus took a few wary steps backward. Daniel let loose another howl of laughter, and as if incensed with the Scot, the animal nudged him in the shoulder with its muzzle.

“So I’ll stay away from him, then. Easy.” Angus felt the heat of anger and embarrassment rise to the surface of his skin.

“And Auntie would have my baws on a stick if I didnae take care of my new boss to the verra best o’ my ability.”

“But I’m cool. Really.”

Charlie whinnied before once again nudging Daniel, whose expression turned to one of frustration.

“Angus James Macgregor, ye’re about as stubborn as Charlie. Now, the way I see it, ye have two choices. Either do as I say, or spend the rest o’ the afternoon mucking the stalls. What’ll it be, hmm?” Eyes narrowing, Daniel pressed his lips into a thin line as if challenging Angus to defy him.

“Talk about stubborn.” Muttering a few choice profanities to himself, Angus did as he’d been commanded, even though once he had the damnable thing on, the strap irritated as it rubbed against his skin.

“Helmet hair or no’, ye’re quite the braw lad.” With the broadest of smiles, Daniel grabbed his own helmet and buckled it on.

“Uh, thanks. I think.”

“Welcome. Now, up ye go.”

Gripping the reins, Angus slid his left boot into the stirrup and hoisted himself up and onto Jezebel before grabbing hold of the pommel to pull himself into position. Angus couldn’t hold back a whimper when an errant hand brushed against the back of his knee as Daniel adjusted the fittings. When the horse began to move, his already thudding heart raced, the sensation of Daniel’s gaze as it burned a hole in the back of his head making him giddy.





Chapter 5





From the moment Daniel had set eyes upon one particularly handsome Australian, he knew he was done for. The Scot’s rather unusual sensitivities had earned him the reputation of village oddball, more or less guaranteeing he’d be spending the rest of his life alone. He was a man most tried to avoid. He’d even been called a devil-worshipper at one point, such was the fear and misunderstanding his talents tended to conjure. The visions and gossip he’d encountered living in a town with such a long and chequered history had forced him into becoming a virtual recluse.

Now Angus had arrived everything was different. Daniel was different. And for the most part, he couldn’t seem to wipe the smile off his face.

Daniel found himself astounded by how much his life had changed in the past five years. Desperate to help her nephew come out of his shell, Maddie had begged William to give Daniel any job he could find. The old man had agreed, employing the then twenty-five-year-old, and the rest, as they say, was history. Relieved that the castle and its grounds had remained blissfully silent, Daniel gave himself permission to enjoy doing a few minor repairs, tending the horses, and interacting with the guests.

The Scot had come so far since those darker days, due to Maddie’s constant interference, and the fact that both she and William had accepted he was gay without an utterance of disapproval. Was it now within the realms of possibility that Daniel Ramsey could live a normal life? Maybe even marry someday and have children?

Those were thoughts he’d never dreamt of entertaining before.

Daniel let out a lingering sigh, his musings once again turning to the tragic love story he’d heard many times before. The same story that for some reason had been on a continuous loop in his head ever since Angus’s arrival. Alexander’s soul was said to have haunted the castle and its grounds for centuries, while James’s ghostly form had appeared for just a short while after his death before disappearing forever. Tourists often visited hoping to catch a glimpse of the supernatural, but no sightings had occurred in decades.

It was a terrible situation; Alexander suppressing his feelings for James in order to gain wealth and power, and James being put to death because of the torch he carried for his brother-in-law to be. Daniel couldn’t fathom being so in love, only to be denied, for if he knew nothing else, he knew one thing without doubt. If love ever came his way, he would grab hold and never let go.

“Daniel? You okay?”

The sound of Angus’s voice pulled Daniel from his thoughts, and he turned to catch the look of concern as they ambled toward the rear of the property. “Aye,” Daniel assured with a wink and a broad grin, heart fluttering at the easy smile reflected back at him.

Woodlands laying either side of the narrow path, the sunshine dappled through the ancient oaks while the men talked and laughed. The horses slowed when they came upon a lake, and the remains of a small chapel and graveyard, stopping just short of the dilapidated gate guarding the entry to the hallowed ground.

The two men dismounted and removed their helmets while the horses began to graze nearby. Daniel watched Angus take in the beauty and vastness of the countryside for a brief moment before he pulled the rolled up blanket from his saddle and spread it across the soft patch of grass beneath a lone birch tree. Removing his backpack, he emptied its contents until the corned beef with mustard pickle sandwiches, flasks of tea, and wedges of fruit and cheese were laid out.

Daniel sat cross-legged on the edge of the blanket and leant against the thick trunk, patting the vacant space to his right. Without hesitation, Angus plonked down next to him, pressing his back against the gnarled bark, long legs tucked under his arse.

“So, I’m guessing you know all there is to know about me courtesy of your aunt...”

“True enough.” Daniel nodded, knowing there wasn’t much point in arguing the man’s statement. He knew Angus Macgregor inside and out, not only from his conversations with Maddie, but because William had tended to blurt about him without so much as one tiny bit of provocation.

Daniel unwrapped a sandwich and offered Angus half. With a nod and a lopsided smile, Angus accepted the food and took a large bite. The little sounds of appreciation he made as he ate caused Daniel’s mouth to go dry.

“So then, tell me about yourself. Even the score up a bit.” Angus poured them both a cup of strong, sweet tea.

Daniel took a swig, grimacing as the hot liquid seared its way down his gullet. “No’ much to tell, really,” he replied as he bit into his sandwich, chewing and swallowing slow as he dared in order to give himself time to think.

Locking eyes with Angus, he saw the curious expression etched on that gorgeous face, and it appeared genuine enough. Daniel wanted to tell this beautiful man everything, but he was no fool, either. He didn’t see how it was possible to share the details he’d kept well-hidden since living and working at the castle without appearing insane.

“Now, I don’t believe that for a second.” Angus inhaled the rest of his food, then picked up his tea and took a sip, deep blues filled with question.

“Hmm, all right then... let me see.” Scratching his chin, Daniel tried to figure out what to say without revealing too much. He didn’t want to scare the boy away, after all. “I was born in Tarbet thirty years ago, and my sperm donor ran off and left us when I was eight. Lucky for me he never merrit my mother, or I’d have been stuck with the name Campbell for the rest o’ my days. Anyway, I lost Maw to a stroke five years ago, and that’s when Auntie got me the job here. Haven’t travelled much, and I like the peace and quiet. That’s about me in a nutshell.”

“You’re kidding, right? That’s it?”

“For now.”

Angus’s eyes narrowed then softened, a misty longing held within them. “Okay then, I guess I can accept that. For now.” He paused for a moment before he cleared his throat, adding in a sympathetic voice, “Just so you know, I get what it’s like to lose your parents.”

“I bet ye do. Ye ken what I hate the most?”

With a slight shake of his head, Angus waited for Daniel to continue.

“People expect ye to get over losing someone in a set amount o’ time, when all anyone can do is find a way to deal wi’ it best they can.”

“I know what you mean.” Angus’s face bore an expression of despair, and Daniel wanted nothing more than to reach out and touch him… take away the pain any way he could.

“Anyway, no sense in dwelling on things we cannae change.” Daniel tried a smile on for size before taking another bite of his food.

“Ain’t that the truth,” Angus agreed, the hurt expression he’d worn replaced by a look of understanding.

The two sat in silence until they finished their lunch before Daniel got to his feet.

“Come on. I want to show ye something.”

Daniel made his way to the rows of graves which sat atop the small hill that overlooked the water. Glancing over his shoulder, he watched Angus scramble to his feet and brush a few errant crumbs off his shirt before sauntering up the hill. Once the Australian was standing next to him, Daniel turned and stared into the distance, the sense of peace he felt in that moment overwhelming. No matter how many times he took in the blooms of heather which encircled the glen as far as the eye could see, the view was always breathtaking, but now he was sharing it with the man standing by his side? Words escaped him. Daniel’s gaze flicked to Angus, who shuddered then inhaled the fragrant air deep into his lungs.

“Cold?” Daniel somehow managed to resist the temptation to wrap an arm around Angus and pull him close.

Angus tilted his head and shook it once, a small smile emerging. “I’m fine. Just can’t seem to get enough of the scent of these flowers, that’s all. And the view? It’s fantastic!”

“Oh, aye, that it is.”

Angus turned and walked toward the graves, before stopping at the one closest. “So, this is Lady Catriona, huh?” Angus’s fine fingers traced along the roughened edges of her headstone.

Catriona’s grave was in the same row as her father’s. Though cracked and worn, many of the epitaphs difficult to decipher, Daniel knew each and every monument like the back of his hand.

“Aye. Most o’ the Macgregors are buried here, William included.”

“I wish I could have made it here in time for the funeral.” A look of guilt and sadness marring Angus’s face, he came upon his uncle’s recently dug grave. Bowing his head, the Australian stood in silence for several long moments before uttering a few Hail Marys.

“The main thing is ye’re here now,” Daniel assured in an unobtrusive, gentle voice. Without a word, Angus continued to make his way past each grave, praying for the dead as he’d done with his uncle, mourning the loss of a family he’d never known.

When he was done, Angus stared at the murky waters before he turned toward Daniel, glistening eyes filled with emotion.

“I know James isn’t here because he was thrown in that lake, but whatever happened to Alexander?”

Daniel grimaced and rubbed the back of his neck. “The details are sketchy, but from what I ken, his remains were buried in an unmarked grave somewhere between here and Ardgartan. Exactly where is anyone’s guess.”

“How awful.” Angus’s face contorted into a pained look, while a chill ran through Daniel.

“‘Twas a tragedy all round. To be put to death because o’ who ye love? It’s just no’ right.” Daniel eyed Angus with caution, wondering if there would ever come a day when he’d love someone that much. An unfamiliar but welcome sense of longing swelled in his chest, easing the ache he’d felt moments ago.

There was no doubt Angus was his type—tall and slender with clear skin, a smattering of freckles across his nose and cheeks, and red lips lush and kissable as well as eyes he could lose himself in for days. What he felt was more than physical attraction, though. Daniel sensed a connection between them, one he could neither explain nor deny. He hoped his instincts were correct. That Angus felt that same connection.

“No, it’s not,” Angus agreed as he cast Daniel a wary glance. “So, um... you’re all for gay rights, then?”

Daniel held his breath, and hoped. “Weel, since I’ve been out for the past five years, I’d have to say, aye, I am.”

“That’s good to know. I mean, love is love, right?” Though Angus’s statement wasn’t an outright admission, the bright smile that accompanied it spoke volumes.

“’Tis.” Daniel nodded, and his heart and cock throbbed in time.

“So, I’ve been meaning to ask, is Alexander an ancestor of yours? You know, because you share his last name?”

It was clear the boy wanted to change the subject, but Daniel didn’t mind. He pretty much had all the information he needed, anyway.

“Oh, aye. I’m a direct descendant of his little brother, Michael Ramsey,” Daniel confirmed.

“It’s strange to think that if Catriona had ended up marrying Alexander, we’d have been related somehow.”

“That’s a verra disturbing thought.” Daniel gave a mock look of disgust, while Angus began to laugh good-naturedly, the sound of his mirth warming the Scot’s heart so much he had no choice but to join in.

Once their laughter abated, Angus’s expression turned serious. “Can I ask you something?” Daniel nodded. “I know the castle isn’t supposed to be haunted anymore, but I was wondering, have you ever, um, seen anything strange happen around here before?”

“Here? No’ specifically.” Angus shot Daniel a rather odd look, but he decided to ignore it. “It doesnae matter either way. William kept Alexander’s spirit alive enough by telling anyone who’d listen how often there’d been visitations.”

“Can’t say I blame him for making out the place is haunted when there’s such a morbid fascination with things that go bump in the night. I mean, look at how many ghost hunter reality shows there are on TV. People can’t seem to get enough of that stuff, even though it’s as fake as hell.” Angus rolled his eyes.

Like a dead weight, Daniel’s heart sank to the pit of his stomach. It appeared he’d been right not to reveal too much, for if Angus didn’t believe in the existence of the spirit world, then how could he be convinced of Daniel’s ability to see the souls of those who had passed?

“Oh, I see. Another sceptic who doesn’t believe in the existence of an afterlife unless it beats them about the head with a mallet.” Daniel’s voice had turned from smooth into acidic in a heartbeat.

“If you’d asked me a month ago, I gotta admit you’d be right, but now, I don’t know. I get why it makes good business sense to have people believe the castle was once haunted, but ever since the day I got here, I’ve been feeling... I can’t explain. It’s like there’s something in the air. Guess you think I’m nuts.”

Angus chewed his lip and frowned, and all Daniel wanted to do was comfort him. Tell him he understood.

“No’ any more than me.” Thumbing his chest, the Scot smiled.

“Well, it’s good to know that if I did end up in the loony bin, I’d have someone there to keep me company.” Angus chuckled, while Daniel reeled.

And his cock? It might have danced a jig or two. Is it possible Angus thinks the existence of ghosts normal after all? God he hoped so, because Daniel knew he’d never felt like this before.

“There might be hope for ye yet, Angus Macgregor.” Without any thought of the consequences, Daniel grasped Angus’s wrist and pulled him close, ignoring the man’s surprised squeak as he took him in his arms.

Daniel thought he’d pass out once the firmness of Angus’s semi-hard cock pressed against his thigh. Though the possibility that he was about to ruin everything flitted through his mind, he sensed if he didn’t make his intentions known right that moment, he’d never be brave enough to try again.

“Daniel? Wh-what are you doing?”

Lips inches away from Angus’s, Daniel gazed into darkening blue eyes… eyes that swirled with a combination of lust and shock, and found he was unable to stop himself from doing what he felt he must. Unfortunately, the moment he brushed his lips against the soft warmth of Angus’s, he felt it.

The unmistakable sensation of a presence not of this world.

Air alive and crackling with energy, the once gentle breeze turned icy and began to gust. As if he’d been electrocuted by thousands of volts, the most agonizing pain Daniel had ever felt shot up his arms, causing him to stiffen, then jerk away from Angus and stagger backward. Before his mind could catch up with the onslaught to his body, the air shimmered, while the blurred outline of a male figure materialised.

Daniel had seen enough pictures to know the ghost of his long-dead ancestor Alexander Ramsey was making his grand reappearance. The apparition floated toward them, the burning need to protect Angus at all costs causing the Scot to stand his ground. Dressed in black and red belted plaid all torn and grubby, and hair dark as night, Alexander Ramsey was a terrifying sight to behold.

“Take yer hands off my James!” the entity’s voice boomed, while wild, green eyes glowed with hatred.

“Go away!” Daniel screamed at the top of his lungs, covering his ears in a futile attempt to rid himself of the following ear-splitting wails that drowned out everything else. Groaning in agony, the Scot cowered, clutching his skull, blood pulsing through his veins at a sickening rate.

“Daniel? Are you okay?”

Daniel was certain Angus was yelling at that point, but he was barely able to hear the sound of the man’s voice. With every second that passed he felt himself grow weak, white heat blazing through his body at such a rapid rate, it was as though he were about to turn into a pile of ash. Then, as quickly as it had begun, it was over.

The winds calmed while birds once again found sweet voice. Daniel’s heart rate began to slow, and to his relief, the agony which had wracked him moments before simply ebbed away. The excruciating pain in his head had also eased to a dull, throbbing ache. Breathing in deep, he straightened and watched the soul who stood next to Angus dissolve into a tiny ball of light, essence clinging like a thorny vine until it vanished.

“I’m fine. Bit o’ a migraine,” Daniel answered in a strained voice, pinching the bridge of his nose before turning his gaze skyward. “Come on. I think it best we head home.”





Chapter 6





The pair rode back in silence; Angus distracted by the most bizarre experience of his entire twenty-seven years, Daniel looking more than a tiny bit worse for wear.

While Angus didn’t believe Daniel’s explanation for what went on in the graveyard, he also felt incapable of considering any other possibilities. He didn’t want to think about the hairs rising on the back of his neck the moment Daniel had taken him into his warm embrace, nor the hot-cold sensation that followed when he’d felt something other than Daniel touch his arm.

When they arrived at the stables, both men fed and watered their horses. After they were done, Angus urged Daniel to take some painkillers and rest while he went back to the castle to help Maddie with dinner. Daniel conceded without argument, and Angus left the stables before Daniel could even think about changing his mind.

Of course, once Angus had freshened up and changed then headed downstairs, one determined, portly woman pounced the moment he stepped foot inside the kitchen. With a quick thanks to Chef and the rest of the staff for preparing the evening meal of shepherd’s pie, she let them know she and Angus would handle the vegetables and dessert and sent everyone on their way.

“So, my boy. Did ye have a good day?” Maddie wore a conspiratorial smile as she handed Angus an apron and pointed toward the sink where a colander full of beans awaited.

“You mean date, don’t you?” Angus shot Maddie an accusatory glare before tying the apron around his waist. He picked up a small paring knife and began to string then slice the crisp, green vegetables.

“Erm... weel...” Maddie’s gaze shifted around the room, and Angus couldn’t help but snicker at the thought of her being so flustered.

“It was fine. We rode, we talked...” he trailed off, teasing her on purpose.

“And that’s it?” Maddie’s tone was filled with disappointment.

“Not exactly.” Feeling his skin grow hot, Angus relayed the strange sequence of events, glossing over the details of the sweet little kiss he and Daniel had shared. He then informed Maddie that Daniel was unwell, and that she shouldn’t expect to see him again until morning.

By the time Angus was done talking, all the colour had drained from Maddie’s face. He had hoped the woman would scoff at everything he’d said, or at least remind him how easy it was to imagine things with the castle’s history being what it was, but never had she looked more distressed.

“If I tell ye something, lad, can ye promise to keep an open mind?” She picked up a potato and peeled its soiled skin with dexterity before rinsing it under the tap and tossing it into the large pot of water that sat bubbling on the stove.

“Sure, I guess.”

“Ye see, the truth is, I believe Daniel might have seen the spirit o’ Alexander Ramsey in that glen.”

“What?” Gasp catching in his throat, Angus just about choked on his own spit.

“He sees the souls o’ those who have passed, lad. Has done ever since he was a wee bairn. For as long as I can remember no’ a single disturbance has occurred, no’ even courtesy o’ yer uncle. I have to assume the ghost is that of Alexander, since his spirit is the only one known to have haunted this castle in a long while. Here was I, thinking it safe for Daniel to live and work here, but it seems I was wrong.” With a loud huff, Maddie threw the last of the potatoes in the pot before tossing the peelings in the bin, and then wiped her hands on her apron.

“Bloody hell. I have no idea what to say.” Angus was shocked by Maddie’s revelations, but in the back of his mind, he also sensed she was speaking the truth. Felt it in his bones, even. Something had happened in that glen... something that defied rational explanation. Then there were the all-too-real dreams Angus had been having, as well as the weird vibe he’d been trying his best to ignore ever since his arrival. One that was growing in strength with each passing moment, even as he and Maddie stood in the kitchen preparing dinner.

“I ken what I’m telling ye is a lot to be taking in, lad. Believe me, I do. But ye need to understand that Daniel is neither a madman nor a fool. He’s just sensitive to a world most o’ us cannae see. He likes ye verra much, and hopes to be more than a friend to ye, I might add. I widnae want to see that jeopardised because o’ one particularly mischievous wraith.”

Angus tensed at her words. The very idea of what the woman was telling him should have compelled him to jump on the next plane to Sydney, but who was he kidding? He’d made a promise to himself to stay, and people were counting on him to follow through on that promise. It didn’t hurt knowing Daniel was gay, either. In fact, that knowledge alone made him want to stay despite what he’d just learned.

“I have to admit, I kinda like him, too.” He gave Maddie a self-conscious smile.

“Oh? So, could ye see yersel’ pursuing someone like Daniel, if ye don’t mind my asking?” Maddie enquired.

Boy, is this woman pushy. Angus glanced at her with wary eyes and tried to swallow the knot which had formed in his throat without much success. If things hadn’t gone pear-shaped in the graveyard, he couldn’t deny he’d have been tempted to jump Daniel’s bones then and there. Could he risk everything and just go for it? After all, they were both unattached, and the fact that he and Daniel worked together didn’t seem to bother anyone else, not even Maddie, so why should it bother him? So what if Daniel communed with the dead? Everyone had their little foibles.

“Stranger things have happened, I guess.” Heart pounding and sweat forming on his brow, Angus gave a non-committal shrug, earning himself a beaming smile from his cooking companion. But as if day had turned to night, the air grew cold and dank right before the fire on the gas stove blew out.

Smile turning to a look of uncertainty, Maddie shut off the burner while a terrible sense of foreboding burrowed under Angus’s skin.





Chapter 7





Dinner was served late, and was a quieter affair than usual. Whether it was because the guests were exhausted after their day-long trip or because Daniel wasn’t around, Angus could not say.

What he couldn’t deny was that he missed the company of one odd-but-alluring Scot.

After they cleaned up, Maddie trotted off to her lodgings with a plate of food in hand for her nephew while Angus took himself to the library. Settling into the couch, Angus pulled his phone from his pants pocket and googled Alexander Ramsey, deciding that whether or not he believed in ghosts, knowledge was power.

The facts online were similar to what was in the book, but what frightened yet excited Angus the most was his reaction the moment he laid eyes on a hand drawn picture of Alexander. With the Ramsey crest above his head alongside a description of the same red and black tartan which Daniel had worn the first night they’d met, Alexander looked so much like the man in his dreams it was downright eerie.

“So that’s you, hmm?” With a gentle, almost reverent touch, Angus stroked the outline of the drawing, committing each and every curve and line to memory. “You were a handsome devil, weren’t you?”

The moment those words left his mouth, the air around him grew bitter. The same feeling he’d had in the glen crawled over him, an intense static electricity brushing across his cheek. Angus shuddered and looked around the room, the ice-cold seeping through to his bones.

“Alexander?”

The small lamp on the desk flickered at the same time the word James flitted through Angus’s mind, the sound so erotic it stole the very breath from his lungs.

Every inch of his skin prickled, the sensation of being watched barely overshadowed by an overwhelming rush of desire which headed straight for his groin. He knew what he was feeling was irrational. Hell, at that point, Angus wondered if he was asleep in his bed, dreaming this shit up, but there was one thing he knew without doubt. Somehow, in some twisted, inexplicable way, this felt familiar.

“Oh, for fuck’s sake, snap out of it.”

With a determined shake of his head, Angus stood and switched off the light before slamming the door shut and locking it behind him. As he headed down the dimly lit hallway, his teeth chattered and the air misted with each heaving breath he took. Sleep was what he needed. After all, he was jetlagged, and the heating was as faulty as the kitchen appliances, apparently. The castle couldn’t function properly without either. He would get a good night’s rest, then ask Daniel to see to the repairs first thing in the morning.

By the time Angus reached his room and shut the door behind him, he felt drained. Heading straight for the bathroom and shedding his clothes, Angus filled the tub before he took a hot, luxurious bath, scrubbing his body until every inch of him was clean. After dressing in a grey flannelette nightshirt and matching sleep pants, he slid between the sheets, confused and exhausted. With a long exhale, Angus closed his eyes and began to drift, relieved that the strangest day of his existence had come to an end.





Chapter 8





The entity watched Angus’s eyes flutter and close, knowing he could no longer wait. Though he’d managed to drive that maddening redhead away for now, he would return to the boy’s side soon enough.

He moved closer, wishing more than anything he were still human—even for just a fleeting moment. He craved to pleasure his James the way in which he deserved; his love for him deeper than the most fathomless of lochs.

Staring down at the boy before him, Alexander remembered the last time they were together with both sorrow and regret. He’d planned to spirit James away well before either of them were discovered missing, but upon seeing him that night, sprawled naked across his bed, cock hard and clear blue eyes filled with desire, what had remained of Alexander’s reasoning had slipped away in an instant. In its place had been a burning need that could not be denied… one that would not wait. Their coupling, however, ended before it had even begun. A desperate sob escaped Alexander when he remembered what then followed.

His future father-in-law, Hamish Macgregor had burst through the door, sword held high, a look of pure hatred on his face. After screaming for his guards to join him, Hamish had then slain his own flesh and blood before Alexander’s horrified eyes. Imprisoned in the castle’s dungeon, there Alexander had remained for several long days and nights, heart ripped to shreds, body growing weak from lack of food and water.

His only solace had come one night when he’d overheard the guards speak about the exact whereabouts of James’s body, and from that moment forth, Alexander had wanted nothing more than to join his love in the afterlife. The very next day, he’d gotten his wish. All but dead from starvation, he’d been dragged to the village square and burned at the stake, his only crime falling in love with another man, remains then thrown into a crudely dug grave in the nearby forest. Moving so fast everything around him had become a blur, he’d then found himself standing at the gates of Clan Gregor Castle.

The moment the account of the terrible tragedy from all those centuries ago passed through Alexander’s psyche, a sudden burst of light and energy he had never felt before filled the room.

With tears flowing down her cheeks and broken sobs escaping unbidden, Catriona emerged and stood before him. She glanced at the prone man before meeting the gaze of her once-betrothed. It was the first time Alexander had seen Catriona since the day before they were to have wed. A sense of regret piercing his fragile heart, he got down on one knee and bowed his head in reverence.

“Lady Catriona, I cannae begin to tell ye how sorry I am.” His voice, so soft and gentle, was filled with unending sorrow and he longed to make amends with this poor soul.

Catriona reached down and caressed his face, urging him to look at her.

It was the first time he’d been touched by another spirit, the sensation more akin to love and light than anything physical. The moment their eyes once again met, he was greeted by a beatific smile.

“I am the one who should be sorry for keeping ye bound here all this time,” she answered in a sweet, angelic voice.

“I dinnae understand. Bound?” Alexander stared at Catriona in confusion.

“Just as love can transcend death, hatred and unfulfilled destinies can bind a soul to Earth forever, but I must confess something to ye. James crossed while ye were alive. I took him into the light so ye’d never find him.”

“Naw!” Alexander’s long-dead heart lurched, pain lancing through him as if he’d been sliced open and left to bleed. He had spent every moment of his existence wandering the halls and grounds of the castle in search of James. Now, it was clear why he’d failed. In times more recent, he’d even disappeared into himself, such was the level of his frustration.

Catriona sobbed. “Ye ken James Macgregor has returned in the body o’ that boy...”

“Aye.”

“When James found out what I’d done, all he wanted was to come search for ye. The moment we made our peace, Finlay came. I never did thank ye for trying to save him.”

He knew to whom Catriona was referring. The battle had been fierce, the number of those lost at Leuchars Castle too many to count. Finlay Grant had fought bravely alongside Alexander, and once reinforcements had arrived, victory was theirs. But as the last of the enemy was slain, Finlay had warned Alexander to move the moment before being struck in the back by a lone man who’d been hiding in the nearby bushes. After running the coward through, Alexander did everything he could to save Finlay, but the amount of blood pouring from his wound was too great, and he was gone within moments.

“I only wish I didnae fail.” Then Alexander would have been free to be with the one he’d always loved.

Catriona’s smile broadened to the sweet one Alexander remembered, and she glanced at the light… toward the faint figure of Finlay before fixing her gaze on the man she once thought meant for her. The love Alexander felt emanating from her in that moment braided the pieces of his cracked heart together; a heart which had been torn asunder for so long.

“I ken, Alexander. Though none o’ us can change what has come to pass, I cannae see ye suffer a moment longer. His soul belongs with ye. Go to him. Consummate yer love before it’s too late. Only then will ye be able to join us.” And with that, she was gone, the light blinding as the heavens took her and Finlay into its bosom.

Time stood still.

The air heaved and pulsed as if it were living and breathing.

When Alexander rose and moved across the room, he felt oddly different. He glanced downward, and all at once, the opaque image of a hand appeared as if he were alive again, albeit absent of a pulse. It was when he gazed at every part of his new form that he had his epiphany. The heavens had granted him one final opportunity, and he was not about to let it pass him by. Admiring Angus Macgregor’s perfection from a distance like a fine work of art would never be enough. He had to touch him. Take him. Unite their souls once and for all.

The man belonged to him. Had done so for centuries. For all that time, Alexander had watched and waited, hoping his one true love would return. And return he had, in the form of the most beautiful creature he had ever laid eyes upon.

Standing by the foot of the bed, Alexander watched as Angus’s eyes rolled under closed lids in blissful slumber, his deep exhales emitting a fine mist the closer the entity came. The moment he willed his hands to move, he was shocked to find he could grasp the bedspread, then each layer of woollen blanket, before peeling the fabric downward and away from the glory that lay beneath.

It wasn’t long before all the bedclothes were gathered in a pile on the floor, and though Angus shook with the cold, Alexander would not allow him to wake. Not yet. Lowering his mouth to his beloved’s ear, he whispered the same lewd suggestions he had done that day in the bath, smiling as he once again gifted his lover with the most sensual of dreams. Dreams of a time long gone, of a Scotsman coming to his room and taking him without apology.

Craving to touch the softness of Angus’s skin, to bask in his humanness and to press his lips against the sweet plushness of the blood-filled ones beneath him, his mind willed it so. In the blink of an eye, the buttons of Angus’s nightshirt were opened one by one, the thick material falling to the side and exposing a firm chest covered in a light dusting of hair. Rose-red nipples, already constricted and filled with his life’s blood, tightened farther when the icy air hit them. Once again, Angus shivered, but Alexander knew he would be so caught up in the sensuality of his dream that his mind would refuse to be roused.

Goosebumps rose and spread quickly across the surface of Angus’s skin, down his dappled ribcage, and across the defined ridges of his stomach. Alexander slid the sleep pants off with care, feasting his eyes on the man’s generous cock which rested semi-erect against the protuberance of his hip.

Oh, heavens be. Ye are glorious!

Alexander may have seen the boy naked before, but never like this, spread out before him, wanting and waiting. Long lashes graced the highest of cheekbones, while deep red lips curved into a sensuous pout. Alexander was so moved by the sight before him, a low, throaty sound rumbled from deep within—one filled with a longing that hadn’t echoed down the halls of this castle in many a year.

Hovering over his soulmate, Alexander pressed a soft kiss to his lips before moving lower and melding his mouth to his left nipple. While Alexander suckled the hard nub, Angus moaned and writhed, utterances of profanity mingling with the most decadent sounds Alexander had ever heard. Angus’s breathing was rapid as Alexander’s hands danced across his skin until the other nipple was worked just as thoroughly. Continuing to roll and pinch, he moved lower, levelling his mouth with the other man’s cock. Staring up at Angus and smiling, Alexander parted his lips and sucked him down in one large swallow.

Screaming in ecstasy, Angus arched into the entity’s deft touch.

To an outside observer, Angus would appear to be alone, the only evidence of another presence in the room the finger-shaped indentations rippling across rapidly heating flesh... erect cock moving of its own volition as the foreskin slid downward and rose up and over the crown repeatedly.

“Fuck!” Angus cried, eyes shut tight.

The amount of effort it required to elicit such a physical act caused Alexander’s energy to wane with rapidity, while the light which had surrounded him moments earlier began to dim and flicker. What little energy remained emanated from the same corner of the room from where Catriona had emerged.

Though he felt loath to do it, Alexander had no choice but to release Angus, lest he disappear for good. He roared out his frustration but not a sound escaped, his bellowing cries once heard throughout the castle more like a memory long forgotten. He was losing his grip, but he did not plan on giving up. He would have his one true love this very night, or by God, be sent to purgatory trying.

The sound of approaching footfalls pounding down the hallway caused Angus to stir, and yet, still he did not wake. Instead he lay there, as if waiting for Alexander to claim what had always been his.

“Please, Alexander, don’t go,” Angus implored as he slept on unawares.

Hearing the boy speak his name brought forth burst of light and energy anew, while a raging inferno surged through his being just as the door flew open.





Chapter 9





It was late. Maddie and the guests had long since gone to bed, so when Daniel headed for the kitchen for a quick cup of tea and heard a keening, lustful cry of, “Fuck,” coming from the direction of Angus’s room, he broke into a sprint, not stopping until he’d burst through the door and switched on the light. He stopped dead the moment he laid eyes on the scene before him, heart breaking into a thousand shards while long, opaque tendrils wrapped around a half-naked and writhing Angus.

Since that pivotal moment in the glen, Daniel had been well aware there’d be a battle on his hands, but to bear witness to this? Nothing had felt more painful. Despite the fact that Angus might have been attracted to Daniel, could have even grown to love him someday, how in God’s name could he compete with a blasted ghost? Then anger took hold, rage and determination filling the Scot to the brim. He couldn’t allow this for far more reasons than selfish ones, for it would be a sure way to send Angus running all the way back to Australia.

“Oi, wee ghost. Stand aside!” Daniel shouted, spittle spraying from his mouth with each word, the commotion causing Angus to flinch.

In the following moments Daniel encountered the spirit’s wrath. The bedroom door slammed shut, then an ear-piercing howl filled the air. A large brass candlestick which once sat atop the hearth was hurled at Daniel’s head, but he dodged it before it met his skull. The Scot had never felt such fury emanate from an entity before, but he wasn’t about to leave Angus to its mercy either. He couldn’t.

“Ye will never have him. I willnae allow it!” Daniel fended off another missile, this time a glass vase, and it smashed as it hit the wall behind him. He grew more fearful with each passing moment, the possibility that harm could come to Angus and everyone else in the castle causing the already present fear and panic to rise a hundredfold. What kind of psychic medium was Daniel if he could not control this out-of-control poltergeist?

Then the room fell silent, right before Daniel heard a man weeping, the sound so pitiful, so filled with despair.

“Please, I beg o’ ye. Let me hae him,” the spirit implored as it came to life, translucent and crackling, and filled with an intense white light. Alexander was once again dressed in the Ramsey tartan, and hell, did he look frightening.

He was not of solid form by any means, but Daniel could make out his every detail easily enough.

Daniel’s breathing laboured. His chest heaved. Rising and dusting himself off, he approached his nemesis, knowing he had to figure out what to do, and fast, for as long as Angus remained at Clan Gregor Castle, this thing would never leave him in peace. Pushing his terror way down deep, he folded his arms across his broad, puffed-out chest and stood eye-to-eye with the creature.

“And what then? Ye ken more than I ye cannae fully satisfy him. Or would ye have him live the rest o’ his days wi’ a shadow as his only companion?” Daniel’s voice resonated with conviction.

“I dinnae want to see him suffer, but what else can I do? I love him.” The ghost sobbed, his face bearing a grim look of defeat.

“And Angus isnae the man ye once loved. Surely ye can see that.”

Grimacing at the painful truth, the ghost inclined his head.

“Now, it seems to me ye have a decision to make. If ye love him as much as ye say, then let him go. Give him the chance to live a normal life.”

Ramsey’s ghost glanced at the corner of the room before locking eyes once more with Daniel. “I cannae leave. I’m bound to this place till the deed is done.” Alexander spoke in a sad, broken voice.

“Deed?” Like a punch to the gut, a wave of nausea struck Daniel out of nowhere, anger turning into feelings of abject horror.

Is he saying what I think he’s saying? He swallowed the bile beginning to rise up his gullet.

“I must consummate our bond or be bound to him forever.”

God, no!

For several long moments Daniel stood there, fists clenched, glaring at the ghostly form, until Angus’s needy whimper caused the Scot’s gaze to dart toward the bed. It was then an idea struck. One he abhorred, but one that would not only give him the one thing he desired more than anything, but put an end this once and for all. Daniel took a step back, then moved to stand in the middle of the room. Closing his eyes, head tilted back and arms stretched out to his sides in supplication, he let out a long, shuddering breath.

“All right, then. Do it. Use me,” Daniel implored. “Use me, ye facking bastart, so we both get what we want.” When the thought of Angus not wanting any part of this entered his mind, Daniel opened his eyes and glared at the being. “But remember one thing. If he refuses, then ye must find some way to leave, or I swear, I will send him someplace ye’ll never find him.”

Seconds ticked by at an agonising rate as Daniel watched Alexander’s expression change from confused and hesitant to one of clarity, of acceptance. All the while this was going on, fear and doubt threatened to drag Daniel under. If Angus agreed to this, what did that make Daniel? Some receptacle for ghost sex and nothing more? Before he could tell Alexander this was all a big mistake, that he’d changed his mind, it was too late. The ghost had already faded into a fog and was drifting toward him.

The Scot’s every muscle tensed as the spirit entered his body, and he yelped at the awful pain that flooded his entire being. No matter how inevitable his predicament, Daniel wasn’t about to make this easy, logic turning to instinct as he fought the entity every step of the way. His efforts made little difference, though. When the two minds became one, Daniel was relieved to discover he was still aware of everything around him… that he still existed, albeit in the presence of unwelcome company. Emotions pervaded his mind like an overflowing cup. Never had he felt anything like it.

As if a spell had been broken, the moment his soul converged with Alexander’s, Angus awoke with a start. Daniel wanted nothing more than to warn Angus—tell him to leave this place and never look back—but he found himself unable to move or speak. With the amount of lust emanating from his partner in crime, Daniel felt powerless to stop him anyway. He had fallen victim to the selfish yearnings of a cunning, determined entity, of that there was no doubt, but as Alexander moved toward the bed, actions stilted yet filled with purpose, Daniel’s fear began to ebb away. In its place was a need he’d never felt before, and as he stared down at startled blue eyes, desire surged. His cock filled. And his balls were so full and tight, he was certain they were going to explode at any moment.





Chapter 10





Dragged kicking and screaming from the most sensual dream he’d ever known, Angus jerked awake and sat up, chest heaving, hand resting over his thudding heart.

“Ma beautiful boy.”

Angus shook his head in an attempt to clear it, a sense of foreboding raging through him when he focused on the figure at the end of the bed. Oh, yes, it was Daniel standing there all right, looking gorgeous as ever, but at the same time, a few things did not add up. For one, the Scottish brogue, so rich and deep, was far thicker than Daniel’s. Then there was the man’s threatening stance. And what’s with the eyes? Where Daniel’s were the colour of whiskey, molten green filled with desire and intensity now stared back at him.

“Daniel? Is that you?” Angus questioned, wide-eyed.

In response, the Scot’s face fell. “Naw, lad. ‘Tis I, yer Alexander.”

Flying into a panic, Angus scrambled up the bed until his knees hit his chest and his back was pressed against the headboard. Angus stared at the hulking man before him, the fear and doubt reflected back causing his breath to falter. “But you’re not... he... where’s Daniel?”

“Here.” With a hand placed over Daniel’s heart, eyes never leaving Angus, a tentative smile graced Alexander’s lips. He then pressed a knee to the mattress and made his way up the bed until he was kneeling before Angus.

“You mean he-he let you use his body?”

“Aye.” Cheeks flushed crimson, Alexander nodded.

“I’m scared.” The man before him ran a warm hand up his arm and across his shoulder. That one bit of contact reawakened Angus’s traitorous cock, which did nothing but confuse the hell out of him. “I don’t understand what’s going on.”

“Nor do I, ma boy, but we willnae allow any harm to come to ye. That we can both vow.”

“But how can I trust you? I saw it with my own eyes. You tried to hurt Daniel.” The anger rose in Angus, but that didn’t stop Alexander from moving closer.

“He wanted what was mine.” His tone was brash. Unapologetic.

“But you’ve been dead for centuries. I can’t possibly be yours.” As if attempting to move an immovable object, Angus tried but failed to push the hulking man away.

“Aye,” Alexander admitted with a sad smile as he glanced toward the corner of the room. “But ye ken as weel as I whom ye once were, don’t ye, James Macgregor?”

“I...” Incredible as it sounded, Angus knew in his heart of hearts what the man was saying was nothing but the truth, but that didn’t stop him from being concerned for Daniel’s welfare. “And I’m supposed to believe Daniel was willing to go along with this? To-to let all three of us...” Angus raised a questioning brow.

“It widnae be possible without his permission.” Alexander gave a solemn nod, then reached out and caressed Angus’s face.



Gaze filled with longing and wonder and cheeks growing hot under Alexander’s palm, his James’s expression softened. His touch seemed to calm the boy, and as James’s body grew lax, Alexander had never felt more relieved.

“I can’t explain why, but is-is it wrong that I want this? That I want you both?” James stammered, his admission causing a grin to stretch wide across Alexander’s face.

“Naw, mo chridhe. ‘Tis nothing but richt.”

James flung himself at Alexander and hugged him tight, burying his head in the man’s chest, the two men on their knees as they clung to one another. The Scotsman inhaled a shuddering breath, groaning at the scent of his boy’s arousal, revelling in the sensation of heated skin pressing against his own. Memories from long ago paled into insignificance now Alexander held his lover in his arms. James sobbed, while Alexander wept, tears of joy flowing warm and wet down his face. Unable to get near enough, he held his boy close, his loving embrace and whispered words of love a testament to how much he had missed him.

Pulling back enough so he could stare into eyes of dark sapphire, Alexander pressed his mouth against his lover’s soft, full lips. The kiss was sweet and slow to begin with, tongues intertwining in a delicious dance, but once Alexander got a taste, his need soon became urgent. Breathing a lusty growl into James’s wide and inviting mouth, Alexander rediscovered what it felt like to touch and be touched as teeth scraped and hands moved in desperation.

Alexander canted his hips forward and his clothed cock, as it slid against his one true love’s, grew harder with each delicious pass. Unable to hold back any longer, the Scotsman tore off James’s opened nightshirt, tossing it aside before rolling him onto his back.

The sudden movement caused James to draw in a large, stuttering breath.

“And now, time to take ye the way I’ve always wanted,” Alexander announced in a low, lustful tone. Buttons flew and fabric gave way as the Scotsman forcibly removed every stitch of his clothing. James’s responding moan to Alexander’s nakedness pleased him greatly. With a confidence bordering on arrogant, the Scotsman licked his hand from palm to fingertips before grasping his ample cock to guide it between the deep cleft of James’s arse cheeks. It took a moment for James to respond to the imminent intrusion, but respond he did.

“Wait!”

With a palm suddenly pressed against his chest, Alexander whined in frustration.

Reaching for the bedside table, James pulled the drawer open and quickly found a tube before popping the lid. He squeezed a generous dollop of clear fluid on the tips of the Scotsman’s fingers before tossing the tube on the pillow.

After sniffing the substance, Alexander rubbed his fingers together, eyeing the wet slide between them with curiosity.

“It’s lube. It stops my arse being ripped to shreds.”

“Like oil?” Alexander questioned, and James nodded. “Verra guid.”

“Now I hate to say this, but no glove, no love.”

“Whit?”

James reached into the drawer again and pulled out something Alexander had never seen before. He watched in utter confusion as James tore the brightly coloured square in two and pulled out a cock-shaped sheath.

“We need to use this condom to protect us from all those dreaded diseases out there, because God knows what terrible ones Daniel has.”

James snickered, while Alexander felt an amused grin tug at the corners of his mouth.

Staring down at Alexander’s hard cock, thick and wet with desire, James licked his lips before gripping the Scotsman’s generous girth.

The man’s hand felt astounding wrapped around him. But when James began to stroke Alexander’s entire length, the head disappearing and reappearing between his tightened fist, the Scotsman knew he was about to erupt.

“Oh, I beg o’ ye, lad, dinnae stop.” Eyes half-closed, Alexander grunted, while his body shook with need.

After a few moments, James slowed to a stop. Before Alexander could voice his disapproval, James had rolled the odd-smelling sheath down the Scotsman’s stiff length and oiled it well. Without a word, James grabbed Alexander’s hand and coated one finger liberally with more of the slippery substance before guiding his fingers toward his pink, tight hole. Grasping his knees, James pulled them toward his chest until he was fully exposed.

Alexander ran his tongue across his bottom lip as his gaze honed in on his lover’s most intimate place. He didn’t hesitate, pushing the slickened digit in as hard and deep as he could.

James hissed, body tensing at the intrusion, but after a few moments, to Alexander’s relief, he began to relax.

Watching with rapt fascination, Alexander grabbed hold of James’s cock, pumping and squeezing the stiff shaft at the same time he thrust one finger, then two, in and out. When he nudged something deep inside that was the size and shape of a walnut, a breathy little moan escaped James.

“God, oh fuck, I’m...” James looked as though he wanted to scream when Alexander halted his movements, thick fingers slipping free from the man’s body just in time.

“Now can I hae ye?” Alexander pleaded.

James reached up to caress the face of the man, well, the two men, who were about to have their way with him, his hand soft and soothing against Alexander’s stubbled cheek. “Yes.”

Feeling his grin spread wide, Alexander pulled James closer until his legs were splayed, arse resting on his thick, muscular thighs. Running his hands up and down James’s legs, Alexander grasped his sheathed cock and guided it toward home. “Mo chridhe.” Eyes rolling and fluttering, Alexander groaned when he breached his beautiful boy’s body for the first time, before drawing back and thrusting forward in one single, abrupt movement.

The Scotsman must have been using more force than James was used to, his responding yelp causing Alexander to freeze. Every muscle straining as he held himself motionless, he watched and waited for a sign that James wanted to continue.

After a few moments, Alexander got his wish. With a whispered, needy, “Fuck me,” James nodded his assent, then began to fist his cock in earnest.

Breathing out a large gush of air, Alexander drew back and surged forward, murmuring words soft and reverent as he took his lover in slow, gentle thrusts. The feeling was so wonderful the Scotsman thought he was going out of his mind, Daniel’s lurid thoughts as they played in his head only serving to spur him on.

Alexander pushed James’s legs up and out, his goal to find that same walnut-sized spot he’d found before. He knew he’d succeeded when a strange, keening noise rose from the back of James’s throat.

“Mmm, yes. Right there.” The air left James’s lungs in short gasps, his words such a powerful aphrodisiac, Alexander’s lovemaking went from soft and sweet to brutal and unforgiving. Urgency and need unleashed in its entirety, he ravaged his lover again and again, just as he’d always dreamed.

Words and sounds tumbled from James’s lips in a wild, unrelenting litany, and Alexander knew the man was close to completion. Which was a good thing, because he, too, could feel a tingling sensation spread from deep within the pit of his stomach all the way to his groin.

Back arched and every muscle tight as a drum, James yelled and shook as warm leavings coated his hand and stomach in several long spurts.

Alexander was unable to hold back any longer. Head thrown back, he followed James into the abyss, exploding deep inside his lover before collapsing on top of him, eyes heavy-lidded as James stroked his back with slow, circular movements.

“I love ye so much, ma sweet, beautiful James.” The moment Alexander’s spent cock slipped free of his lover’s warm, tight body, the boy beneath him tensed.

“Angus,” he said, clearing his throat. “My name is Angus.”

With a sad smile, Alexander stroked the face of the man whose soul he would love for all eternity. “I ken yer name, but to me, ye’ll always be ma James.” No sooner had he made that declaration than a white light filled the room, bathing Alexander in its glow. Once Catriona as well as his parents appeared, Alexander was no longer able to resist the call. “Thank ye, lad, for granting me this. For freeing me.”

Angus gave Alexander an affectionate smile. “I’m glad I could help. Now go. It’s time.”

Brushing his lips against Angus’s, tears streaming from his eyes as they squeezed shut, Alexander added in a rush, “Gun an ath turas a choinnicheas sinn.”



Angus knew the precise moment Alexander had left Daniel’s body when frantic, light brown eyes shot open and roamed all over him.

“Angus, are ye all right?”

“Me? What about you?” After what he’d just witnessed, Angus was more concerned for Daniel’s than his own welfare.

The Scot waved a dismissive hand. “A bit o’ a migraine, but I’ll live. Now, please just answer the question.”

“I’m fine.” A sense of shame danced around Angus’s head, overshadowing the post-orgasmic euphoria he’d felt moments before. He wondered what Daniel would think of him after what had happened.

“Oh, thank Christ.” Daniel drew Angus into his arms and held him tight, whispering words of adoration and regret as he pressed light kisses to Angus’s neck and shoulder. “I’m so sorry. Will ye please forgive me?”

Pulling back and taking in every detail of Daniel’s gorgeous face, Angus traced his fingers over the tears he knew Alexander himself had shed. “There’s nothing to forgive. I’m the one who-who let him...” Ducking his head, Angus stared at his chest until a thick finger placed beneath his chin forced him to look up.

“Only because I did, too.” At his admission, Daniel glanced toward the corner of the room and let out a loud sigh before his eyes met with Angus’s once more. “Besides, he’s gone now, so I’d have to say mission accomplished.”

Rolling them over until he was situated on top, Angus ground his growing erection against Daniel’s, the friction and their close connection causing the both of them to groan.

“I guess. So, um,” he panted, thrusting his hips forward once more, “I was hoping now we’re finally alone, we could go for round two, but if you have a headache…” Grin blindingly beautiful and eyes filled with fire, Daniel wrapped Angus in his hulking arms, then pressed his lips to the shell of his ear.

“What headache?”

As they shared a kiss, so sweet and soft and filled with promise in that most sublime of moments—one of many he hoped he’d share with his beautiful Scot—Angus James Macgregor felt like he’d finally come home.





EPILOGUE


1 Year Later...



Morning broke, the faintest hint of sunlight filtering through the window. Angus yawned and stretched his tender muscles before rolling onto his side and reaching for his lover. He groaned in frustration when he found the other side of the bed cold and vacant.

“Looking for me, by chance?”

The familiar, yet deeper than usual timbre of Daniel’s voice roused Angus in an instant. Rubbing his eyes with the heels of his palms, he sat up, his tired gaze greeted by the sexiest of sights. Oh, lord. He’s wearing that bloody kilt again.

But that wasn’t all.

Sitting on the small loveseat which had been moved to the centre of the room, Daniel nursed a bunch of hand-picked heather in the crook of his arm, while a small breakfast tray filled with hot tea, buttered toast, and two soft-boiled eggs sat on the end of the bed. Shifting in his seat, Daniel ran his thumb and index finger across his bushy eyebrows, a cheeky but somewhat awkward grin stretched wide across his face.

Satisfied as Angus had been after partaking in a night filled with mutual blow jobs, his cock reacted as though it hadn’t seen action in years. He paused to take in every inch of the man he’d fallen for. The beard Daniel had grown in was neat and trimmed close to his skin, while his normally long, flowing hair was shaved at the sides, the remainder pulled back in a tight, knotted bun. Aside from the kilt, which was riding up the Scot’s strong thighs as he rested his ankle across his opposite knee, the only other thing the man wore was a black leather jacket, and his familiar scuffed, half undone, heavy black boots. Angus’s gaze fixed on those legs, between which sat Daniel’s cock, already thick with need; while his balls, so full and ripe and covered with a smattering of auburn hair looked so tempting, Angus wanted to lavish them with his tongue for a good few hours.

“Mind tell me what’s going on?” Angus croaked, swallowing the spit which had pooled in his mouth while palming his sheet-covered erection.

Smile turning lecherous, Daniel tucked the flowers under his arm before rising and picking up the tray, which he placed across Angus’s lap with care. “Weel, considering it’s been a year to the day since I made ye mine, I thought we could celebrate. Happy anniversary, mo chridhe.”

Angus’s heart thundered. The only time Daniel had called him by that name had been in this exact room twelve months ago to the day, but he wasn’t sure that counted since it had been Alexander who’d actually said it.

That night was one Angus would never forget, and for so many reasons other than the obvious. Not only was it the first time Angus had encountered a ghost, but he’d had a front-row seat as the man he was falling for was possessed. After it was over, and they’d made love, Daniel had then told him everything he’d thought and felt. How it wasn’t just Alexander, but he whom Angus had taken to heights he could never have imagined. That was when the Australian knew he’d met the man he was meant to be with, always.

Privy to Alexander’s thoughts, Daniel had gone on to inform Angus that he also knew everything there was to know about the Scotsman, including the whereabouts of both his and James’s bones as well as his final wishes. Fulfilling them was never going to be easy, but Daniel and Angus had been determined to do their utmost.

The weeks that had followed comprised a lot of research as well as several trips to Loch Lomond and the town of Ardgartan, the two men doing everything from locating two sets of remains, to having them exhumed and transported to the town’s undertaker. Days later, arrangements were then made with the local minister to conduct a small graveside service. Maddie, Daniel, and Angus, as well as the rest of the castle’s staff, were in attendance. Three of Daniel’s cousins and several people who’d known William for many years had also come to pay their respects.

Once the formalities were over, a lone piper had begun to play “Amazing Grace”. Family members had then been called forth to grab hold of the ropes and lower first James, then Alexander’s coffins into the shared grave. Angus recollected laying eyes on the imposing headstone that he and Daniel had chosen for their ancestors. Aside from the usual names and dates, also etched into the dark marble had been an epitaph which read the same Gaelic words Alexander had last uttered. When Angus had asked Daniel to translate their meaning, he smiled as he was told in a quiet whisper, ‘until we meet each other again’.

After James and Alexander had been laid to rest, the mourners had then returned to the castle, where they’d shared a hot lunch as well as some traditional oatmeal biscuits and a dram or two to honour the dead. By the time everyone had left, it was early evening. The two men had then headed for William’s library, where they’d begun penning the most recent events in a brand new volume of the Macgregor family history. When they were done, they’d made love by the fire, and it was then Daniel had made his feelings for Angus known.

Angus’s response?

Declaring his love for Daniel before inviting the Scot to move in with him.

Angus was brought back to the present when Daniel sat on the edge of the bed and handed him the somewhat wilted flowers. He picked at the blooms in an effort to straighten them out before placing them on the pillow next to him. ‘Thanks.” Angus felt a fierce blush suffuse his face, while his cock, already filled to capacity, was pushing against the underside of the tray.

Gaze filled with intensity, Daniel leaned forward until their lips met in a slow, sensuous kiss. “Welcome.” Daniel stood and opened the wardrobe, pulling out Angus’s riding gear and tossing it on the bed. “Now, eat up and put this on. I’m taking ye riding.”

“But what about the guests?” Angus’s care and concern for all he met, along with a knack for website design coupled with the events that had occurred one year ago, had thrown Clan Gregor Castle into a new stratosphere.

Rumours abounded of what guests had overheard that night, the story even making the papers. But when Daniel had informed Angus that the spirit of William had paid him an unexpected visit the morning after Alexander had left, it got the two of them thinking. Not only had William given their union his blessing, he’d also urged Daniel to share his gift with the world, even assuring him a spirit guide would be there to help the Scot along the way. Once his mother had appeared, dressed in flowing robes of white and looking younger than he’d ever remembered, Daniel decided to embrace his gift rather than continue to run from it.

Ghost tours of the castle were then reintroduced, while Daniel hosted private readings. Ever since, they’d been booked solid, so much so that Angus had been forced to hire a number of new staff to help cope with the influx. Hectic as his life was, Angus had never been happier.

“Did I no’ tell ye Auntie took our guests on a wee trip to Glasgow for the Carmunnock Highland Games? The bus just left, and they won’t be back till tomorrow afternoon. She even gave the kitchen staff the day off,” Daniel announced with a smirk, casual as ever.

“Are you trying to tell me we have the whole place to ourselves for the next twenty-four hours?”

“Aye, give or take. And I plan on making the most o’ it, starting with recreating everything that happened this time last year. So get up, get dressed, and meet me at the stables. We’ve a busy day ahead.” Shooting Angus an evil wink, Daniel disappeared through the door and shut it behind him.

It took a few beats for Angus to wrap his head around the gravity of Daniel’s statement, then a few more before it dawned on him that the eyes that had just flashed his way had turned a pretty, vivid green...


What do people need to believe? Now, there’s a question that can be taken more than one way. One might say that all we need to believe is the capacity for abstract thought – it often seems we need precious little else. People have believed in fairies, Valhalla and the necessity of the Berlin wall. Sometimes what once seemed obvious to us all turns out to be completely wrong. People believed the world was flat. It was a good guess. Seemed right. It wasn’t until science built up enough evidence to the contrary that everyone came to accept the world was round. Yet there are still many who can’t really understand why we don’t fall off.

In the end, it doesn’t matter. We accept the world is round. We don’t fall off.

So. What do we need to believe?

Do we need to believe that we are not alone? No. There are lonely people. They live. They may not live happily, but they live.

Do we need to believe there is a point to life? Do we need to believe there is something for us after we die?

Again, no, though it is certainly depressing to hold such points of view.

But perhaps we want to believe. We want very much to believe that there is something greater than us. Something we don’t understand. A point that nobody gets, not even the geniuses. Something that science can’t pick apart and make us feel like children. For that we have faith, a belief so strong that it doesn’t need evidence. Faith in astrology. Faith in reincarnation. Faith in God.

It is hard to have faith. Scientists tell us we do need evidence, that we are fooling ourselves and we have faith in science, so we are dispirited and torn. So we look for evidence of the existence of something, anything, that science and the rational mind are at a loss to explain.

We look for ghosts.

If you say you have been reincarnated you are treated like an idiot; nobody accepts you were really abducted by aliens and only psychopaths believe they have talked to God. But ghosts? So many people claim to have seen one. Can they all be deluded? Perhaps. There are precious few photographs of spectres that don’t look as though someone inadvertently put their thumb in front of the camera. It could be that eighteenth-century highwayman you saw outside the window was on his way to a fancy-dress party. It’s easy to doubt your own mind in the cold light of day.

A poltergeist is a different matter. Poltergeists move things. They are physical. There may be a scientific explanation for this phenomenon – but that discipline, for all its doggedness, has so far failed to come up with a satisfactory one. Maybe scientists aren’t trying hard enough. Perhaps they don’t believe enough to really explore the phenomenon. If so, shame on them, for there are few unexplained things left to explore. The defence of the rational mind is that historical poltergeists are the product of ignorance and modern cases are hoaxes. They cite the Amityville or Enfield poltergeists – two of the best-documented cases in history – as proof. Both turned out to be fakes. The witnesses were misrepresented, or had something to gain. ‘Evidence’ turned out to be manufactured. It’s hard to argue with that.

In the two years between 1999 and 2001 there have been over 70 recorded sightings of the entity named the ‘Mackenzie Poltergeist’. Witnesses to its attacks ran into the hundreds. They were observers who just happened to be there and they had nothing to gain.

If there is an explanation for the Mackenzie Poltergeist, ‘didn’t really happen’ isn’t one of them.

This is its story.





Gill


Statement given by Gill Bruce on 12 April 2001. Gill is a 21-year-old student studying at the University of Edinburgh, Scotland.

I worked over Christmas 2001 in a gift shop and, on my way home after work, I stopped in to see a friend of mine called Ben Scott. His house looks over Greyfriars graveyard, which I have always found fascinating as well as a bit macabre.

Ben had told me about the poltergeist which is supposed to haunt Greyfriars and had commented that the house seemed to have a ‘resident ghost’. He thought this was very funny, but I couldn’t see how living in a haunted house, in a graveyard, could be a laughing matter.

We were sitting having coffee in his living-room when we heard the toilet flush in the bathroom, just outside the living-room door. ‘It likes the bathroom,’ Ben said. I know that doesn’t sound exactly terrifying, but it sent a chill up my spine. There was nobody else in the house to flush the toilet and no mistaking what the noise was.

I might have brushed it off, but the next time I went to Ben’s house there was another ‘incident’. Ben was sitting in his living-room with his friend Duncan when I arrived. They told me they had heard what sounded like someone jumping around in the spare room, though there was nobody else in the house. Again, I didn’t believe it and thought they were making fun of me – but suddenly there was a tremendous crash from the spare room. There was no mistaking where the sound came from and, of course, we went to see what it was.

The room was completely empty.





The City of the Dead


Cauld blaws the nippin’ north wi’ angry south

And showers his hailstanes frae the Castle Cleugh

Owr the Greyfriars, whare at mirkest hour

Bogles and spectres wont to take their tour

FROM ‘THE GHAISTS: A KIRKYARD EPILOGUE’ BY ROBERT FERGUSSON (1750–74) (DIED AT 24 IN BEDLAM ASYLUM JUST OUTSIDE GREYFRIARS GATES)

Two weeks ago Lisa Allen from Boston visited the Graveyard on the tour. She said, ‘There was no doubt this was real. I felt it and I never want to feel it again.

‘Is this graveyard the home of Edinburgh’s scariest poltergeist?’

EDINBURGH EVENING NEWS, 3 JULY 1999



On the day after Christmas, Ben Scott came home from a party to find blood running down his apartment walls.

This would have been traumatic enough under normal circumstances, but Ben Scott’s circumstances were not exactly normal. His house was in Greyfriars cemetery – a graveyard that had long been regarded in Edinburgh lore as home to an impressive variety of ghosts and spectres. A cemetery that had, in recent years, become famous as the site of a supernatural entity known as the ‘Mackenzie Poltergeist’. To make matters worse, Ben Scott’s job involved taking nightly tours round the graveyard to show visitors ‘The Covenanters’ Prison’ – a locked section of the cemetery. In that section was a tomb nicknamed ‘The Black Mausoleum’ and this, supposedly, was where the Mackenzie Poltergeist could be found.

If Ben Scott had been a believer in the paranormal he might have wondered if the Mackenzie Poltergeist hadn’t just paid him a visit in return. But he didn’t believe in that kind of thing.

He took off his coat and put it on a coat hook. Then he got a chair, pushed it against the wall, stood on it and looked carefully at the red stains. The substance had dried but it certainly looked like blood. Ben licked his finger, ran it down a discoloured patch of wall and was about to put it to his lips when he thought better of it. He really didn’t want to know what this stuff tasted like.

He considered the possibilities. The whole thing could be a practical joke by his friends, though he couldn’t begin to imagine them playing a prank this elaborate. Even so, he got off the stool and checked his windows. Outside in the graveyard, tombstones poked granite heads through pristine snow, each ancient marker topped with a frosty halo. Even the trees were crowned with thorns of ice. It was the first white Christmas Ben could remember for years. He looked down. The snow was unbroken below both windows and the windows themselves were still fastened shut.

Ben got a flashlight from his cupboard, fetched a short ladder from the hall and stood it under the small trapdoor in the ceiling. He laboriously hoisted himself through the dark square and toppled into the attic.

‘This is a hell of a thing to be doing at Christmas,’ he groaned to himself. ‘Especially with a hangover.’

He began to crawl gingerly across the cold attic slats, the weak beam of light from his torch wobbling around in the darkness. He had never been up here before, and his eyes made out boxes of forgotten toys from someone else’s childhood. The beam of light suddenly gleamed off a pair of beady eyes staring into his own.

‘Aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaargh!!! Oh, hello teddy.’

Ben shone the torch behind the tatty stuffed bear and, seeing something else glisten, shuffled closer and ran his fingers over a wooden roof beam. It was wet.

‘Aha!’ he said softly, a smug grin on his face.

Ben’s parents came down from the north that afternoon, bearing gifts. His mother watched as he excitedly tore apart a huge, ribbon-infested parcel.

‘It’s a garden ornament,’ Ben held up a silver-painted plaster cherub. ‘That’s lovely. No, really, it is.’

‘I know you don’t have a garden,’ said his mother, ‘but I thought it would go well with your surroundings.’ She nodded furtively towards the graveyard outside, as if the present was designed to appeal to the dead residents as well.

Ben’s father stood, hands in pockets, and looked around. ‘What’s that muck over a’ the walls?’ Ben had tried to clean off the red stains with a damp cloth, but had only succeeded in spreading them around in wide, rusty swabs. It looked like he had engaged in a ritual slaughter, then unsuccessfully tried to hide the evidence.

‘The thermostat on my boiler broke.’ Ben pointed to the cupboard where the boiler was kept. ‘The water started boiling and forced steam up the overflow pipe and onto the roof. The steam melted the snow, the water ran back down the pipe, hit the top of the boiler, evaporated and spread out across the roof under the wallpaper.’

‘Why does your roof hae wallpaper on it anyway?’ Ben’s father was never one to let a good explanation go uninterrupted.

‘It was like that when I moved in. Anyway. Under the wallpaper, the water must have picked up rust or some kind of red dirt. When it reached the walls it started to run down, carrying the red stuff with it.’

‘But there’s nae join between the wallpaper on the roof and the wallpaper on the wall.’ His father peered upwards. ‘And how come there’s nae red marks on the roof?’

‘I don’t know,’ Ben sighed. ‘I’ll repaint the walls.’

‘You should.’ His mother was placing the angel experimentally in different parts of the room. ‘It looks like somebody died in here.’

By Christmas 2000, Ben Scott had been taking tours in Greyfriars churchyard for a year and a half. In that time, he’d seen much to amuse him: he’d witnessed people collapse, apparently ‘attacked’ by the Mackenzie Poltergeist. He’d lost count of the cuts and bruises visitors claimed had been inflicted on them by something they couldn’t see, and had watched with amusement as psychics bumbled among the granite tombs pointing out deceased residents at every turn. He’d smiled when hysterical women on the night walks he led insisted something was touching their hair in the dark.

Ben couldn’t believe that people really fell for that kind of stuff. Yes, it was creepy as hell in the graveyard. Once or twice, when he had gone in alone to retrieve a forgotten flashlight, he’d almost had the screaming heebie-jeebies himself – who wouldn’t? It wasn’t that Ben believed he might see a ghost – he was more scared that some escaped convict might jump out at him from behind a gravestone. Or a serial killer. Or a giant, mutant crab woman from Pluto.

Greyfriars at night had a powerful influence on the imagination.

But the graveyard didn’t scare Ben Scott, and neither did its so-called poltergeist. There were plenty of real monsters in the world to do that and just as many demons in the mind.

There was no doubt, of course, that visitors really did collapse in the cemetery; Ben’s tours had an average of one a month. Ben could almost swear he himself had heard whispering and rattling noises in the tombs and he had certainly seen the mysterious cuts and bruises that visitors picked up on his walks. He even had photographs of them.

But Ben wasn’t easily convinced. It was dark in the cemetery and the tour parties huddled together, as social niceties gave way to an atavistic fear of the unknown. Anybody who had a couple of terrified strangers hanging on to them for dear life was bound to acquire a few bruises. It was the same when people fell over – all it took was an impressionable mind, a bit of abject terror and a touch of claustrophobia.

All right. So 27 collapses in a year and a half did seem a bit excessive – many of the victims hadn’t seemed impressionable or frightened, and most of the cuts and bruises had appeared on people who were standing on their own. But if Ben couldn’t come up with a logical explanation in every case, it certainly didn’t mean that some invisible entity was slapping the paying customers around.

Besides, attacks were great for business – people wanted a genuine brush with the supernatural. It was proof that humans were more than eventual worm fodder. So what if it was all in the visitors’ minds?

Ben Scott loved the Mackenzie Poltergeist.

A few days later, Ben had a nightmare. He dreamed he climbed through the trapdoor in his ceiling – only this time he came out, not in the attic, but on top of one of the ancient mausoleums that were scattered throughout the cemetery. Greyfriars was spread out in front of him, teeming with worms of moonlight. Ben felt cold and resigned, as if he had sat here, night after night, for many years. The tomb was where his house ought to be, but he realised he could see all the way across the graveyard to the Covenanters’ Prison – the church that should have been in the way was no longer there. He knew this was how it often was with dreams; they removed obstacles that couldn’t be overcome in the real world.

As he watched, he saw a tall, thin figure with spindly limbs and the body of a concentration camp victim come skipping backwards through the cemetery gates. It was dancing a horrible clown jig, a puppet dance, all arms and legs and wobbling pirouettes. As part of the dance the figure kept leaping backwards into the air – impossibly huge springs – 30 feet, then 25, then 20, landing awkwardly, as if the effort of making each jump were becoming more and more taxing. Each time, it came down closer to Ben Scott’s tomb. The figure’s long leather coat was in tatters and it jerked around like a big black bird that had been shot in the air. With one last exhausted spring, it landed on the grass directly below Ben, staggering badly now, still facing away. Hopping and panting, it continued the frantic movements, breath whistling from a ragged throat, gathering its strength for another leap.

Though he was terrified of this tapping, whispering monstrosity, Ben couldn’t stand the thought that the figure might continue past. More than anything, he did not want to be alone again, to have to climb back into that tomb. In desperation he started to dance as well, trying to move the way the figure was moving, to show he was a kindred spirit. He danced a dance of friendship, hopping up and down and waving his arms around his head. Then he saw the figure’s back quiver and thought it was going to jump again and not notice him. So Ben Scott flapped his arms harder, stamping his feet madly on top of the tomb like a lunatic tap-dancer, until the figure whirled round, glaring up at him, its eyes bulging and spittle spraying from its mouth. ‘Not danthing!’ It screamed at Ben Scott through the lips of a withered corpse, ‘Trying to thtay alive!’

And, hopping and skipping and fighting every inch of the way, it jerked and shuffled backwards until it vanished into the Covenanters’ Prison.

Ben Scott woke up thrashing wildly. His partner was sitting up in bed, her back pressed against the wall. ‘There’s something in here,’ she hissed in a tearful voice, clutching the duvet in front of her as if it were a shield. ‘There’s something in the room.’ Ben looked wildly around, not even sure if he was awake. ‘You were screaming,’ she said quietly.

But there was nothing in the room, and next morning both laughed about how ridiculous they must have looked, terrified and holding each other in the dark.

In January, residents of three houses bordering the graveyard began to complain of poltergeist activity in their homes. Being intimately connected with the Mackenzie Poltergeist and living in an identical setting, Ben’s thoughts, naturally, turned to this. He began to think about his own place and how strangely the human mind worked. It seemed to Ben that, in the month since Christmas, there had been something odd about his flat – he hadn’t considered this until he heard about the other houses. There had been little incidents, nothing he couldn’t explain, nothing paranormal, but put them all together and it was just a little . . . disconcerting. His alarm clock, for instance, never seemed to go off at the time he had set it. Annoyed, he asked his partner if she was playing a repetitive practical joke.

‘No, Ben. I have a life.’

Ben couldn’t recall ever having so many personal things go missing in such a short space of time and none of them ever turned up again. But then, everyone misplaces things – who hasn’t found their house keys in the fridge once or twice? At night he would wake to the crash of framed pictures falling off the walls. So what? The plaster must be weak. Ben just wished they would fall off during the day, when the bang wouldn’t scare the living daylights out of him. The hands of clocks seemed to loosen or stick; well, they must be cheap, poor quality. Light bulbs blew all the time; cheap wiring. A repulsive smell hung in the air by the living-room door for two weeks; spilled garbage that had finally rotted away.

It was just odd that none of this had ever happened before.

One morning in February, at four a.m., Ben heard screaming right below his bedroom window. He leaped out of bed and looked out but nobody was there. The next day he found a dead gull on the grass, one side a mangled mass of stringy red flesh. At first glance he thought a cat had got it, then he worked out the bird had somehow been mangled by an industrial fan set into the wall below his window. The cover of the fan looked as though it had been pulled off, but he still couldn’t see how the bird’s wing could have become trapped. Birds were stupid, but not that stupid.

It looked like the gull had been shoved into the blades.

Ben’s bathroom door had a bead curtain in front of it. An eyesore, he knew, but he had got it second-hand and it was made of bright green plastic which matched the bathroom’s day-glo décor. One night as he lay in bed, he heard the bathroom door swing open, then bang shut, swing open, bang shut. He figured it was due to a draught in the hall, though he’d never felt one there. With each bang the bead curtains would swish and clink, swish and clink. Finally Ben got up and shut the door properly, making certain he clicked the latch, then went back to bed. Just as he was drifting off to sleep, his partner shook his arm. ‘The bead curtains,’ she said simply. Ben heard them swish again, this time not the gentle movement caused by a draught but the loud jingling they made whenever a person walked through them.

For the next month the curtains clanked regularly, always at night, as if the bathroom were haunted by someone with a weak bladder. Ben gave up trying to work out what was causing it and started trying to ignore it.

In early March Ben called a plumber. Something seemed to be wrong with all the pipes in this house. They had begun to bang and pop and the water would spurt, then stop, spurt then stop. The plumber was a short, cheerful man and, as he sat at the breakfast bar drinking coffee, Ben could hear him whistling as he worked in the bathroom. The sun was streaming through the window, a hazy wash which unfolded fans of light into the large pine-floored room and illuminated motes of dancing dust. Ben made a mental note to give the place a spring clean.

The living-room door opened and the plumber put his head round. ‘The strangest thing happened to me yesterday,’ he said. Ben presumed that this was how plumbers always began conversations.

‘What happened to you yesterday?’ he asked, waiting for the punchline.

‘I was working on your plumbing,’ said the plumber. Nothing unusual so far. ‘I heard the bells of Greyfriars ring, then, all of a sudden, I got very cold and sick. I thought I was going to fall over.’

Ben’s coffee stopped halfway to his lips. Steam trailed across his vision and vanished into the tide of light. He glanced over his shoulder, through the sunny window to the graveyard outside.

These were exactly the symptoms that visitors described on his tours before they collapsed.

‘Then when I woke up this morning I found this.’ The plumber rolled up his sleeve and showed Ben his arm.

There was an angry red weal between elbow and wrist.

Ben lay in his bed staring up at the ceiling. It was almost Easter. He had drunk too much and gone to bed alone. As he lay unsuccessfully trying to sleep, he heard a repeated tapping noise just above his head. Ben didn’t know what it was, and he no longer cared. A few minutes later he heard the heavy swish of the bead curtains parting. ‘I’d take those bloody curtains down if they weren’t so classy,’ he muttered. Ben was strangely proud of himself for the way he handled these night noises. As a young man he had always had a vivid imagination – couldn’t watch horror films. As far back as he could remember, he had always been afraid to spend his nights alone – so he rarely did. Now he found he could lie in bed, close to the lair of the Mackenzie Poltergeist, the entity he shared his life with in so many ways, without being afraid.

Ben Scott couldn’t be afraid of the supernatural. He didn’t believe in the supernatural. Ben Scott was firmly convinced that he didn’t believe in anything.

He tried to drift into sleep, but his mind resisted. For in that drift he lost control of his thoughts and they danced and leapt into places he did not want to go. Hypnogognia, the time between sleeping and waking. The time that turns a person’s mind into a soulless tomb, when the horrors in the subconscious crawl up and squat, panting, in their own shadows. The place where a sudden start pulls the sleeper back from staring at the black abyss of his inner self and wakes him in panic.

Ben shot up in bed.

Across the room, something was tapping on the window.

It was a loud tap, a regular tap. The tap of something that wanted attention.

He got out of bed and stumbled towards the window, hands held out in front of him, heart thudding as loudly as the noise he was approaching. The room was black as a tomb. He reached the windowsill, grasped the cord for the blind and pulled. It shot up in a fluid motion and sickly moonlight flooded the room. It was too dark to see far, but the area right below his window was illuminated by a lamp from the graveyard exit. The tapping had stopped the moment he touched the blinds.

There was nobody below his window. There was no place for anyone to hide. There were no tree branches near the glass – there were no trees. Ben opened the window. Lying forlornly on the sill was a small string pouch filled with nuts, which he had bought in the winter hoping to attract birds. It had never worked.

‘That’s just great,’ he growled to whatever feathered intruder was hidden in the shadows. ‘This thing sits here for three months and not so much as a bloody nibble. I finally get to sleep and one of you develops a case of the munchies.’

He shut the window and climbed back into bed. Again he lay wanting to sleep but unwilling to succumb, knowing what his half-controlled mind, as it spun slowly into the world of dreams, would tell him.

That the tapping sound was too loud to have been a bird.

That birds don’t feed at night.





Megan


Statement taken from Megan Billingsly from Leeds on 17 June 1999. Megan had just left the Covenanters’ Prison after being on a walking tour.

My name is Megan. I am 11 years old. When I went into the place first [the Covenanters’ Prison], I wasn’t frightened. It was very dark and I couldn’t see. I was scared then and the man [the tour guide] got me to stand beside him and then I wasn’t scared any more. My arms were very cold. When we got outside I went to my mum and took her hand. It was not so dark, but it was still scary. When we got here [Candlemaker Row, the street outside the graveyard] my mum said, what has happened to your arm? There was blood on my arm. I had cuts on it too. My mum said, how did that happen? Is it sore? I didn’t know, but it wasn’t sore. My arm was very cold and it still feels cold and funny.





Greyfriars


In no part of Edinburgh did summer come up earlier, or with more lavish bloom, than in old Greyfriars kirkyard. Sheltered on the north and east, it was open to the moist breezes of the southwest, and during all the lengthening afternoons the sun lay down its slope and warmed the rear windows of the overlooking tenements.

GREYFRIARS BOBBY, BY ELEANOR ATKINSON

Harder to explain is the Mackenzie Poltergeist, which has generated numerous tales of fire-raising, biting and slapping. The poltergeist has turned up in Greyfriars churchyard.

SCOTLAND ON SUNDAY, SEPTEMBER 1999



Let’s take a tour of Greyfriars cemetery. Not a night tour, for at night the graveyard is just a black maw with headstones for teeth. For a place filled with dead people, however, Greyfriars in the daytime is about as pretty a patch of land as you’d care to see. It used to be a garden and still retains a kind of horticultural pleasantness, if you ignore the gravestones. In the fifteenth century the land was still partly rural and belonged to a Franciscan monastery. It wasn’t until a century later that Mary Queen of Scots turned the grounds into a burial place to relieve the congestion in St Giles’ graveyard.

As the years passed, the city built up around Greyfriars. The emerald lawns, already protected by high medieval walls, became hidden behind rings of massive nineteenth-century tenements as Edinburgh’s population exploded. Safe behind this urban barrier, Greyfriars quietly ignored the ravages of the industrial revolution. Today it is probably even more attractive than during the Victorian era, now that many of the uglier surrounding buildings have been demolished. Tenements on the east side of the graveyard still survive, but the massive influx of bodies over the centuries means that the rising sod has partly obscured their walls. On the street side they look out over a marrow road called Candlemaker Row and are five stories high. On the graveyard side, however, only two stories are above ground and there are ornate tombs built against their sides.

By the time the graveyard reaches the north-eastern end, its camber has become even more bizarre. Candlemaker Row runs down into the Grassmarket – one of the city’s favourite drinking haunts – and here the graveyard wall rises a good 30 feet above the street. On the other side, however, the bodies come within a foot of the top. Here one can see the Martyr’s Monument, a reminder of the hundreds of Covenanter rebels executed in the Grassmarket below and buried inside this earthen strip. Here, a flight of steps leads down to a giant gate separating the graveyard from the revellers across the way. This is one of only two entrances to Greyfriars and, in less ‘civilised’ times, it was where the heads of executed criminals were displayed on poles as a graphic comment on the wages of sin.

The other gate is at the southern corner where the ground is highest, set back between Greyfriars Bobby’s Bar and a row of small shops. Stretching away from this unobtrusive entrance, the western tombs are sheltered by another row of tenements – most of which, like their eastern counterparts, have been converted into offices. Despite its beauty, only a handful of homes are actually within sight of this final resting place. One of those, of course, was the flat which belonged to Ben Scott.

The north-west section of the graveyard is truly breathtaking. From the top of a mountain of sparsely covered bodies, the casual picnicker has an unimpeded view of the splendour of Edinburgh Castle, George Heriot’s school and the spires and medieval skyscrapers of the Royal Mile.

Greyfriars cemetery is both sombre and beautiful. In summer the grass becomes lush and verdant and the trees, though old, are strong and healthy – after all, the horticulture here is well fed. Among the greenery, the headstones do not look out of place as they point their rocky fingers towards heaven. The markers are not regulated or uniform like those in a modern cemetery, for nobody has been buried in Greyfriars for almost a century. Instead, each stone is hand carved and individual, with a character all of its own, and this seems appropriate, for surely those they commemorate wanted to be as just unique as when they were alive. Some tombstones lean left, some right. Greyfriars is more like a sculpture than a normal cemetery.

Greyfriars is almost a work of art.

Around the sides of the cemetery the vaults are large and ornate, some three or four times the height of those they commemorate. Each is adorned with skulls, crossbones and angels heralding the day of judgement, carvings that aren’t exactly subtle in making their point. ‘Your life will end some day,’ they say, ‘so be careful how you live that life.’ Yet these proud and lovingly wrought monstrosities now seem to droop more than the trees. The substance used to make them was sandstone, a material ill suited to prepare delicate carvings to stand up to the ravages of time and weather. Now angels have no noses and demons wear blank expressions rather than demonic ones – and they are all the creepier for it. Even sadder, the writing has faded and left the inhabitants of these great edifices robbed of the one thing they intended to celebrate – their identities.

The kirk itself has weathered well, despite several mishaps. An odd, flat-fronted ‘Dutch barn’, it was built in 1620, wrecked by Cromwell’s roundheads in 1650, accidentally blown up by gunpowder stored there in 1718 and then reconstructed that same year.

As befits a historic graveyard, there are several minor celebrities buried under the gently rolling slopes. Here lie 37 chief magistrates of the city, 23 principals and professors of the university, 33 of the most distinguished lawyers of their day, six Lords President of the Supreme Court of Scotland and 22 senators of the College of Justice. Greyfriars is also the last resting place of George Smellie the printer, James Hogg the poet, William Adam the architect and Captain John Porteous of the city guard, hanged by an unruly mob in 1736; all interesting characters, though their fame, like most of their tombs, has eroded over the years.

There are others below the soil that deserve more recognition than they receive. James Hutton, the ‘Father of Modern Geology’, has only a tiny plaque on the cemetery wall. You’d expect more for the man who correctly theorised how the earth was formed, then went on to provide proof of its rotation. In an unmarked grave lie the mortal remains of William McGonagall, without doubt the worst poet who ever lived.

Beautiful City of Edinburgh, most wonderful to be seen,

With your ancient palace of Holyrood and Queen’s Park Green,

And your big, magnificent, elegant New College

Where people from all nations can be taught knowledge . . .



Talent like that deserves to be trumpeted from the rooftops but, unfortunately, all McGonagall has is another little plaque with his picture on it. And it’s squint.

Even more worthy of fame is James Burnett. A hundred years before Charles Darwin, this Edinburgh advocate wrote a book called Of the Origin and Progress of Language, which contained a theory of evolution. Ahead of its time by a century, the idea was ridiculed and stories of Burnett’s eccentric notions were told in the city long after he was laid to rest in Greyfriars. Less than a hundred yards away is Edinburgh University Medical Department, where the young Charles Darwin studied for two years. No prizes for guessing in which fertile soil the germ of his famous theory first took root.

Of course, the most famous inhabitant of Greyfriars graveyard is not human at all. It is Greyfriars Bobby, the eponymous dog immortalised in Eleanor Atkinson’s book and Walt Disney’s movie. Bobby was a Skye terrier owned by a shepherd named John Gray. His master died while Bobby was still a puppy and the little dog spent the next 16 years sleeping on the grave. If this version of the story is true, then the dog was out of luck, for John Gray the shepherd is actually buried in East Preston Street, over a mile away. It doesn’t matter in the end – people prefer legends to facts. On Candlemaker Row there sits an effigy of the devoted but directionally challenged pooch, the most photographed statue in Scotland.

There is one last tomb in Greyfriars that should be mentioned. It is an ugly, black vault with a high ribbed dome, topped by something that looks suspiciously like a large Brazil nut. This is the tomb of George Mackenzie, advocate to King Charles II. A major political presence in seventeenth-century Scotland, his fame has dwindled over the last three centuries. But the name of George Mackenzie has recently become famous once more, for a very different reason.

A few yards from his tomb, in the south-western corner of the graveyard, is a locked gate. Beyond it lies a long, narrow strip of cemetery, bordered by high, vault-studded walls. This is the notorious Covenanters’ Prison, once a primitive concentration camp for religious dissenters – and the haunt of the Mackenzie Poltergeist.





Siobhan


Siobhan Reuse from Minnesota, USA, entered the Covenanters’ Prison on 20 August 1999. At the time she was a 21-year-old student and was visiting Scotland to see the Edinburgh Arts Festival.

I had been to all sorts of shows at the festival and thought I would try something different, something Scottish, especially since all the performers I’d seen so far seemed to come from other countries. I picked a walking tour to go on, a ghost tour, not for any particular reason – it was just the first thing I saw that I figured would tell me something about the city. I didn’t know what to expect, but it was enjoyable and I found out a lot about Scottish history. The graveyard was a big surprise to me because it must have been 11 o’clock at night and the sky was yellow rather than black. It wasn’t even dark! The graveyard looked pretty and not very scary, though with the yellow light it looked very weird. Needless to say, I wasn’t scared at all, even though I had come on the tour on my own.

The tour ended inside a tomb called the Black Mausoleum. The tour guide began to tell us of all the creepy things that had happened in this place since the tours began. I felt a bit let down. I was enjoying myself but I knew nothing was going to happen and if he was telling the truth, that was the point of being in this tomb anyway, wasn’t it?

Then I just stopped breathing. I can’t put it any better than that. I must stress that I wasn’t scared or tired or feeling unwell, it was more like something had put a hand over my mouth and stopped the air getting in. I took two or three steps back and hit the wall then pushed forwards again, trying to get the guide’s attention or get out of the tomb. I was absolutely terrified and I remember perfectly the sick feeling in my chest that comes with being so scared. I honestly thought I was going to die.

The next thing I remember was when I woke up outside. I was told I had only been unconscious for a few seconds. The guide gave me his address after the tour and asked if I would write to him and say what had happened. I had decided not to because I felt stupid about the whole thing and there was probably a logical explanation for the way I felt. Then I decided I would write something after all, because I can’t deny that it did happen and I have no rational explanation for it.

I will admit that I have never felt anything like that in my life before.





Into The Mouth Of Madness


Behind the Church is the haunted Mausoleum of Sir George Mackenzie: Bloody Mackenzie, Lord Advocate in the Covenanting troubles and author of some pleasing sentiments on toleration.

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON, EDINBURGH PICTURESQUE NOTES 1890

It has been widely felt that the ghost of George ‘Bloody’ Mackenzie, the persecutor of the Covenanters, has haunted the site since his death in 1691. The fact that Bloody Mackenzie’s body is interned in the same site as those he condemned to death has been mooted as a source of cosmic conflict – potentially meaning that the spirits of both parties are unable to rest.

CLAIRE KNEESHAW, ABOUT EDINBURGH, MARCH 2000



December 1998. It was raining hard in Edinburgh and had been for most of the night. The streets of the Old Town shone like black marble and, in Greyfriars churchyard, stray cats sheltered under the flat-topped tombs, the glittering pinpoints of their eyes almost hidden by the cascade. Outside the cemetery, cars roared through dark thoroughfares, sloshing walls of water onto the pavement and eliciting squeals from hardy drinkers dashing, coats over their heads, from one pub to another. Inside Greyfriars the rain was a continual sinister hiss, as if the paths winding between the graves and around the kirk were angry dark snakes.

At around 11 p.m. a hunched, wet figure entered the cemetery. His hair was matted and stuck to his face; his clothes were worn and thick with grime, which was soaking into the fabric under the torrent of water. Normally it wasn’t possible to get into Greyfriars at night, since both of the great gates were locked and the wall was too high to climb. But a television crew, filming a BBC drama, had knocked the east gates off by inadvertently backing a truck into them and they had never been replaced. In many ways the gates were not necessary as a deterrent, for few people were desperate to get into Greyfriars after dark. But to this particular homeless man, the cemetery at night wasn’t as distressing as the idea of sleeping outside in this downpour. There was a homeless shelter down the street, but some people still spent their nights outside – for reasons that were their own – and at least the cemetery provided peace and some rude shelter. Many of the more ornate tombs had roofs and though they were damp and open to the elements, they were better than a park bench in this kind of weather.

The man took the south-western route round the cemetery, where the ground was highest, heading for the Covenanters’ Prison. In 1998 it was still open to the public and the roofs and entrances of one or two tombs there were not yet padlocked shut. To the left of the prison doorway was the tomb of the famous architect James Adams and his family, a fairly enclosed place to shelter, as was the vault next to it.

The homeless man glanced longingly at the tomb of George Mackenzie as he passed it. Nowthere would be a great place to get a semi-decent sleep. Instead of just an iron gate, Mackenzie’s tomb had stout wooden doors keeping the chill winter winds at bay. The only opening that could let the elements in was a small barred aperture in the middle of one door. The man walked up the three stone steps to the tomb entrance and peered at the metal clasp holding the doors closed. No luck – there was a padlock fastened through it, and had been as long as he could remember. Still. No harm in looking. One day maybe, it would be different. One day everything might be different.

The homeless man peered into the pitch-black interior of the vault. He pulled a plastic lighter kept dry by several layers of clothing from deep in his pocket, held it through the bars of the window and flicked a flame to life. By its light he could just make out the bottom of the empty stone sarcophagus and it looked dry.

The homeless man sighed. Too bad about the padlock. The tomb would have been the perfect place to shelter, safe from the weather and away from the prying eyes of anyone who might want to disturb him.

Then, for some reason, on this rainy December evening he did something he had never done before. Instead of continuing on to the south-western mausoleums, the man looked around and climbed awkwardly over the railings that ran from the walls of Mackenzie’s tomb to the vaults on either side. He landed on wet gravel and felt his way round the back. He had seen something when looking thorough the vault door – a glimmer of light, perhaps – he wasn’t sure exactly what. But he decided to find out.

And there it was. Right at the back, where Mackenzie’s tomb and the graveyard wall almost met, he felt a small rectangular hole in the wall. He had no idea what the opening was for, maybe ventilation, though why a graveyard vault would need ventilation was anyone’s guess. Perhaps it was to let rainwater run out of the tomb. It could be a cat-flap for all the drenched man cared – what mattered was that it was just big enough for him to crawl through.

Seconds later, he was standing inside George Mackenzie’s mausoleum. The tomb was cylindrical with a blank stone floor, a floor that was cold and hard but not wet. Not exactly the Hilton, but it was better than a pile of newspapers in some doorway. When his eyes had become used to the blackness, the man noticed that there was a rusted iron grille about the length of a door set into the floor. Flicking his lighter, he brought the bars of the grille into relief and saw that underneath, a flight of steps descended into blackness. He leaned down and gave a tug. The grille gave a little and the man could see that it was hinged.

He had a choice. He could climb back into the rain, find some covering, bring it back and settle down for the night on the floor of George’s tomb. Or he could venture down the dark stairway and see if there was anything useful there. Maybe it was even a little warmer at that lower level – after all, it was below ground, and so a natural shelter. Many people would rather freeze than venture down into a pitch-black tomb armed only with a lighter, though it never seems to stop victims in teenage horror movies. But then, most people wouldn’t have had the nerve to be standing inside a haunted tomb at night in the first place.

The homeless man gave a mighty tug and the grille rattled up in a shower of rust. Holding the lighter in front of him, he advanced carefully down the stairs. An incredible sight awaited him. The stairs led down to another room, and its function was immediately obvious. In a line were four coffins – one, presumably, the final resting place of George Mackenzie himself. They were huge affairs, ornate and solid as any tomb, but they had stood the test of time better than the edifices dotted round the graveyard above. George had been lying there since 1691 and his coffin, safe from the weather in this dark hole, looked as sturdy as it had when they laid him in it.

People have many motivations. Their wants and fears work by a complicated set of weights and measures which are easily unbalanced: gain weighed against fear, desires versus cultural mores. But circumstance, unnoticed, usually tips the balance and its downwards slope is so gradual that nobody notices the effect. Here was a coffin belonging to someone who had obviously been a rich and powerful gentleman. There might be an expensive brooch inside, or a silver snuffbox, perhaps even a shroud which could be used as a blanket. To break into a coffin that had remained undisturbed for 300 years for such a dubious reward would be a damnable act to most people. We generally tend to shun away from grave-robbing for any reason. Then again, most people don’t end up wet and cold and trying to sleep in a graveyard tomb, and it probably seemed to the homeless man that social niceties were the least of his worries.

The balance tipped. He looked around, lifted a stout bit of wood from the corner of the tomb and began to pound away at the coffin seal. He didn’t bother to keep his assault quiet. Who on earth was going to be in a rainy graveyard at this time of night?

Up in the cemetery the dog walker was startled by the sudden noise. It sounded like . . . hammering. He looked around, seeing nothing moving but his dog, sniffing suspiciously round Greyfriars Bobby’s grave.

Yet there it was again. A thumping sound, like the graveyard suddenly had a heart – and his own heart began to pound in macabre harmony. It sounded as though something below the sod was getting ready to rise out of a grave and pull him by his turn-ups into the fiery depths of hell.

Greyfriars at night has a certain way of preying on the subconscious.

He felt a tug at his trouser-leg and his heart almost leapt into his head. The dog looked up balefully from his feet, its mouth full of material. ‘Good dog,’ he whispered. ‘Never do that again. Never.’ The thumping noise began once more and the dog gave a snuffling start. Its owner looked in the direction of the noise, which seemed to be coming from George Mackenzie’s tomb. ‘We’d better take a look and see what that is. Stay close to me, dog. Try to look fierce.’

He switched on the flashlight he always carried for these nocturnal jaunts and made his way towards the sound. The dog walker wasn’t too keen on investigating this anomaly and neither, for that matter, was his dog. Like many locals he knew that George Mackenzie’s tomb had a reputation for being haunted, but there had never been any actual noise from it before.

As if on cue, the hammering noise suddenly stopped. Creeping closer, the man shone his flashlight at the door. The padlock was still in place, still locked.

‘I dinnae ken what could be making that noise, but it’s bloody creepy,’ he said to the dog. ‘That’ll be why you’re sitting away over there and not here protecting me.’

Suddenly there was a crash from inside.

‘What the . . .’

Another balance tipped. The dog walker could have run, but he was a practical man and reluctant to believe that some bogey-man was interrupting his nightly constitutional. He crept up the small stone steps and shone his torch through the aperture of Mackenzie’s tomb door. Like the homeless man he was a brave soul, which was more than can be said for the dog, which sat panting several yards away, pretending to be interested in a stick.

Down below, the homeless man lay stunned. Hammering away at George’s tomb, he had stepped back to get a better swing and toppled backwards through an unseen hole in the floor. Though he hadn’t fallen far, it was enough to knock the wind out of him. Dust caught in his throat and beneath his back he felt what seemed to be splintered wood. There must have been planks or some similar covering over a hidden opening, rotted by who knew how many years of existence, ready to give way the moment someone stood on them. The homeless man fished his lighter from his back pocket and flicked it again.

In the quivering flame he saw that what he had fallen into was a long rectangular aperture, more like a shallow cellar than another room. He must have rolled inside, carried by the momentum of his fall, for the roof was only a couple of feet from his upturned face. He turned his head to the side and brought the lighter up to his shoulder.

There was an eyeless head next to his.

With a gasp he jerked away and as he did so, he felt his cheek scrape against something rough. Swallowing, he brought the lighter round. It couldn’t be. It couldn’t be what it felt like. Another pair of sightless eyes stared into his own. Below them, thick with green mould, rotted teeth grinned a corpse’s grin inches from his own trembling lips, as if it wanted to give him a deathly smooch. The homeless man gave a sob and held his lighter out at arm’s length. The cellar might once have been much larger but now the ceiling and floor were only feet apart. The whole room looked as if it had been filled with lumpy earth, but this was not ordinary soil. Skulls littered the floor. Skeletal hands pointed accusingly out of their earthy prison. Shinbones and femurs were interlocked and pelvic bones and ribcages fused into each other at grotesque angles, warped by the forces of time, water and soil. A thick fur of green mould covered the whole skeletal landscape. The homeless man was surrounded by an orgy of death – a carpet of dismembered remains. He knew with a horrible certainty that the room was filled not with earth but with earth-covered bodies.

His nerve broke. With a shuddering cry, he scrambled across the corpses, hearing ribs snap and collarbones break, and hauled himself out of the hole, not even noticing the pain as his own shins scraped over the ragged exit and his head banged against the rough stone. As he ran up the stairs and burst out of the grille he began to scream.

The dog walker was nervously shining his flashlight into the empty tomb when the homeless man surged out of the open grille on the floor, turned and stared into the light, eyes rolling and jaw hanging slackly in terror. After a few nights sleeping rough he hadn’t looked too pretty to begin with, but now his sodden clothes were matted with green, mouldy soil and his forehead was clotted with blood. Perhaps believing the light was that mythical luminescence you see as you are about to die, he turned and shambled towards it. The dog walker gave a squeak and fell backwards down the stairs.

Seeing the light suddenly extinguished, the homeless man came to his senses and decided that his wisest move was to get out of the tomb, the graveyard and quite possibly the whole city, as quickly as possible. He squeezed himself through the gap at the back of Mackenzie’s mausoleum, vaulted over the railing and landed on the graveyard path, right in front of the terrified dog walker who, on his hands and knees, had just found the flashlight he dropped when he had seen the zombie leap through the floor of Mackenzie’s tomb.

The dog walker pointed the torch at the apparition looming over him. Shining a torch under a person’s chin is always a good way to make them look ghoulish and since this particular person had just emerged, covered in slime, earth and blood from a locked vault, the effect was positively electric. The dog gave a yelp and shot off down the hill towards the graveyard gate. With a remarkably similar noise and at almost the same velocity, its owner followed. The homeless man looked around, trying to see what had terrified them so much. Was something following him out of the vault? He turned and ran after the terrified pair, whose speed increased exponentially, and all three vanished out of the graveyard and down the rainy street.

The police, of course, investigated the incident. They had the tomb unlocked, lifted the grille and walked down the stairs. There they checked Mackenzie’s coffin, but it seemed none the worse for wear. Then they peered into the hole. Skeletal hands beckoned and empty sockets glared from the macabre boneyard below. The police couldn’t tell how many bodies were there – on the surface there seemed to be about a dozen, but the soil bulged ominously and it looked as if there were many more just below the topsoil. It was a room filled with bodies all right, and nobody in the church seemed to know whose they were or how they got there. It was known that George was not the only person interred in the mausoleum and that, once or twice, people of wealth who admired him had asked to be placed in the tomb. (In 1814, for instance, the widow of Lieutenant Roderick Mackenzie of Linessie was laid there after claiming that Mackenzie was ‘nearly related’ to her on her mother’s side.)

But there were enough people buried at the bottom of Mackenzie’s tomb to stage a biblical epic. Were they the corpses of long-dead paupers who had not had enough money to pay for a proper burial? Were they dumped there after the graveyard became too full of corpses to bury anyone new. Had they dug up and thrown into Mackenzie’s tomb to make room when overcrowding in the cemetery had reached its peak?

One thing was certain. They had lain down there undisturbed for a long, long time. Feeling they had now been disturbed quite enough in one night to make up for that, the police shut the grille, padlocked the gate and went back to concentrating on more recent crimes.

The first sighting of the Mackenzie Poltergeist took place a week later.





Tony, James, Heather, Allan


Statements taken by members of a tour party who entered the Covenanters’ Prison on 15 August 1999. The group retired to the pub afterwards and wrote down what had happened to them.





TONY WILLIAMSON, 31, FROM IOWA:


We were standing inside the Black Mausoleum. It was dark in there but the sky outside was not and it wasn’t cold. In fact, it was warmer inside the Black Mausoleum than it was outside because we were now sheltered from the wind. The tour guide [Ben] was very lively telling the stories and I don’t think he noticed anything was wrong to begin with. But I had suddenly gotten very cold. And I mean cold. There were big puffs of condensation coming from my mouth. I suddenly felt ill and I wanted very much to get out of the tomb. I am from Iowa, and I don’t scare easy, but I felt like I would if I was hunting and realised there was a dangerous animal somewhere near. The others say they heard thumping, but I did not. I went to the pub and wrote this down quickly so I would not forget.





JAMES MARKHAM, 28, FROM WORCESTER:


We were standing inside the tomb and suddenly the air was very, very cold. You could tell the difference from just seconds before. I was at the back and I heard what seemed to be a knocking noise. I looked behind the tomb to see if there was anyone hiding there when I came out but the back of the tomb is up against a wall.





HEATHER STRASSMAN, 22, FROM AUSTRALIA:


I was very scared, but just because we were in a graveyard. I didn’t really expect anything to happen. Then the air got very cold and something banged into the back of the wall two or three times. The guide even commented on how cold it had become but he kept talking. I wanted to get out and I looked around and could see other people looking the same way. I was shaking now I was so cold and asked if we could leave. The guide, Ben, wanted to stay and finish his story but I felt like I had to get out. I just could not stay there. Other people around me started to ask to get out too and Ben said, ‘All right, then, let’s go.’





ALLAN MANN, 23, FROM AUSTRALIA:


I was just wearing shorts because it was a warm night. In the Black Mausoleum I was fine at first, then suddenly I was very cold. One second I was okay, the next I also felt sick. Everybody started asking to leave at the same time and I did not want to go because I wanted to see what would happen but I felt so bad that I had to go too. The guide said ‘all right then’ and took us out.

It was totally and absolutely weird.





Something Wicked This Way Comes


In this city of the dead have been interred so vast a number of men of eminence that the mere enumeration of their names would make a volume . . . Here too lie, in unrecorded thousands, citizens of more humble position, dust piled over dust, till the soil of the burial-place is now high above the level of the adjacent Candlemaker Row – the dust of those who lived and breathed, and walked our streets in days gone by.

OLD AND NEW EDINBURGH (1880-1883) BY JAMES GRANT

I’m looking for some kind of premises. A warehouse, a shop . . . anything. But it has to be genuinely haunted . . . and it has to be large enough to take people in . . . I might make it part of a tour.

BEN SCOTT INTERVIEWED ON SCOTTISH CONNECTION, RADIO SCOTLAND, MARCH 1999



In Greyfriars graveyard in 1999, the Mackenzie Poltergeist first made its presence felt. This was done in an almost leisurely way, in the manner of something struggling to come fully to life – or, perhaps, fighting to stay asleep. After all, Greyfriars had plenty of violence, desecration and misery in its history.

Then again, they say misery loves company.

Death is the ultimate unknown and, for many, the ultimate fear. The graveyard is the constant reminder of that fact, a focus for those terrible emotions. And of all the graveyards in all the cities in all the world, as Humphrey Bogart might have said if he weren’t dead, Greyfriars ranks high as a barometer of human transience.

Here are just a few instances. During the great plague of 1568, thousands of diseased corpses were flung into a huge pit in Greyfriars. In 1581 James Douglas, Regent of Scotland, was guillotined outside the north gate for the murder of the Mary Queen of Scots’ husband and his headless body was buried in the section of the churchyard reserved for common criminals. The scholar and historian George Buchanan was buried there with great pomp and ceremony in 1582 – then his headstone gradually sank into the earth and vanished. Greyfriars holds the famous anatomists Alexander Monro primus and his son Alexander Monro secundus, buried in 1767 and 1817 respectively and it was these men and their fellow scientists that brought about yet another of the graveyard’s black periods.

From the mid-eighteenth century to the mid-nineteenth century, Edinburgh enjoyed the title ‘The Athens of the North’ as the centre of the great Scottish Enlightenment. The city led the West in philosophy, architecture, civil engineering, economics, law and science. Edinburgh University was one of the finest in the world – its anatomy department was particularly renowned for its pioneering work in the field of medicine. But to teach it properly, a constant supply of recently deceased bodies was needed, far more than was allotted to anxious medical students and their ambitious professors. Following the newly formed principles of capitalism – formulated by Scots economist Adam Smith – a brisk trade in bodysnatching sprang up to meet the sudden demand for fresh cadavers. Having no watchtower to protect its bodies, and being surrounded by criminal-infested slums, Greyfriars was the favourite location of these ‘Resurrection Men’. At night, they would climb over the north wall, where the trees were thickest, and silently make their way to a recently filled plot. There they would scrape away the earth with wooden spades specially designed to prevent the clash of steel on stone, digging straight down at the end where the head of the coffin lay. When the rough wood came into view, they would prise open one end and carefully slide the body out using hooks and ropes – an anatomist would pay less if the corpse showed signs of abuse. The body went into a cloth sack, the vertical hole was filled in again, the soil was patted down – and nobody but the resurrection men and their medical masters were any the wiser.

Greyfriars, like other cemeteries, employed occasional night watchmen, but guards were easily bribed and it was not unusual to see families, rich and poor, huddled round the graves of recently deceased relatives waiting for their loved ones to decompose enough to be useless to the anatomists. In the churchyard today you can still see ‘mortislocks’, cage-like devices intended to protect newly buried corpses from these entrepreneurs of death.

In one legendary incident, bodysnatchers in Greyfriars pulled an old woman from her resting place and found, to their delight, that she had rings on her fingers. They were happily hacking off the bejewelled digits when she sat up and gave a lusty yell, prompting the grave robbers to depart and, probably, take up a new career. For another of Greyfriars’ many idiosyncrasies was that people were sometimes buried alive. In eighteenth-century Edinburgh you didn’t need a death certificate to be buried, you simply had to look deceased. In the disease-infested slums of the Old Town, citizens were buried as fast as possible and sometimes before it was properly confirmed that they were actually dead. One Victorian estimate stated that 2 per cent of the population were buried alive and scare stories like this prompted some forward-looking citizens to install little bells in their coffins – a case of wishful thinking if ever there was one. This gruesome estimate was, of course, greatly exaggerated, as befitted a society obsessed with morbid fancy, but excavators have found coffin lids with claw and bite marks on their undersides.

In December 1879, the city authorities gathered together a mass of human skeletons that had been excavated from St Giles’ graveyard and from under its adjoining High Kirk. Several tons of bones including, quite possibly, the Covenanting leader, James Graham of Montrose, and the ‘Father of Presbyterianism’, John Knox, were dumped in Greyfriars without even a marker to show where they ended up.

It was common practice in Greyfriars to bury the dead without headstones. Immense overcrowding, horrific living conditions and daily violence guaranteed the cemetery a continual torrent of bodies. Give them all tombstones and within a short space of time nobody would have been able to see the grass. Instead, only the famous or wealthy were allowed to indicate their last resting place. Gradually the pleasant garden valley levelled out as more and more earth was drafted in to cover over the steadily rising mass of human remains. In time, the valley was transformed into a thinly covered corpse mountain, giving the graveyard the unique shape it holds today.

The situation was impossible to alleviate. By the late-eighteenth century, the Old Town of Edinburgh was crammed to bursting point with the deprived and neglected. The Highland Clearances, the Industrial and Agricultural Revolutions and the Irish potato famine caused a mass immigration of the poor into the city and between the years 1800 and 1830, the population of Edinburgh doubled. In the north of the city, the New Town had sprung up and anyone with enough money moved there. But in the cramped, stinking closes and wynds of the Old Town, the population still suffered unbelievable hardships.

Greyfriars was squarely in the middle of this slum-ridden pool of misery. Against the south wall was the poorhouse. On the west side stood a crude hospital and the Heriot school for orphaned children. Outside the east gate was Bedlam asylum, while the north looked through the Grassmarket gallows to the West Bow, the site where notorious serial killers Burke and Hare hunted and killed their prey.

When the Edinburgh poor died they had not far to go. Most couldn’t afford a proper burial – or a coffin for that matter – and were buried as rudely as they had died. The chronicler Arnot, writing in 1779, gave this vivid and depressing description of the cemetery.

The graves are so crowded on each other that the sextons frequently cannot avoid in opening a ripe grave encroaching on one not fit to be touched. The whole presents a scene equally nauseous and unwholesome. How soon this spot will be so surcharged with animal juices and oils, that, becoming one mass of corruption, its noxious steams will burst forth with the prey of a pestilence, we shall not pretend to determine; but we will venture to say, the effects of this burying-ground would ere now have been severely felt, were it not that, besides the coldness of the climate, they have been checked by the acidity of the coal smoke and the height of the winds, which in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh blow with extraordinary violence.



Now, that’s just not nice at all.

Yet despite this horrifically eloquent warning, the stuffing of bodies into Greyfriars’ already packed soil went on for almost another century. Today there are only a few hundred headstones in the graveyard. The number of corpses in this dead metropolis, with no sign to mark their brief existence, are hundreds of times that many.

Ben Scott sat on top of the mountain of bodies, near the east gate, eating a cheese pasty. Filtering through the branches, a weak winter sun cast nets of cold light across a smattering of headstones and, every now and then, Ben inched along the grass to keep ahead of the great crawling shadow of Greyfriars church.

He heard footsteps behind him and turned to see a tall, broad man with cropped sandy hair standing behind him.

‘Well, hello there Alaisdair.’

‘Ben. How’s tricks?’

Alaisdair Watson crouched down next to him and they both admired the view. The two men did not know each other well, but Edinburgh, despite being the capital of the country, has that small-town ambience whereby half the citizens seem to be on nodding terms with the other half. Ben took bus tours round the Highlands, cycle tours round the city and walking tours of the Old Town. He was a familiar sight to many people. Ben wasn’t sure exactly what Alaisdair did – all sorts of things as far as he could see – but one of them seemed to be working in the church at Greyfriars.

The two men exchanged pleasantries, in the manner of people who like each other’s company but don’t really know what to talk about.

Then Alaisdair Watson said something that tipped a balance.

‘I heard you on the radio talking about ghost tours.’ He tapped the ground in front of him. ‘You should do a ghost tour in here.’

Ben looked across the smooth incline, taking in the glimmering spires of the city and the castle with its tiny white Saltire billowing silently in the distance.

‘It isn’t very scary.’

‘Oh. You don’t think so?’

Alaisdair smiled and sat down.

‘Let me tell you a wee story.’ He turned and indicated George Mackenzie’s tomb, squatting behind them like a big stone toad. ‘Couple of months ago, it was raining hard, quite late at night. Anyway, this homeless guy came into the graveyard looking for somewhere to sleep . . .’

The Mackenzie Poltergeist came to life slowly. Its first breaths were light and hardly felt, merely a hint of what was to come. Visitors to the graveyard began to comment on a strange smell coming from George Mackenzie’s tomb and point out that the air around the door seemed unnaturally cold. There was nothing particularly alarming or even unusual about this. Perhaps some animal had become trapped inside and died. And the winter sun crossed the sky behind the offending tomb, so of course it would be cold at the front.

Then, early in 1999, a woman peering into the aperture in the door of Mackenzie’s mausoleum staggered backwards down the steps and landed awkwardly on the ground. It was a sight greeted by consternation or amusement by various onlookers, depending on what type of person they were. Wide-eyed, the woman told the passers-by that a blast of frozen air had hit her with a force that knocked her backwards, a statement, once again, greeted by consternation or amusement by the various onlookers, depending on what type of person they were. It might have been the last gasp of a creature settling back to rest, for nothing else out of the ordinary seemed to happen around Mackenzie’s tomb. Or it might have been the yawn of something finally resigning itself to waking.

A month later the same bittersweet smell and intense cold was reported in another tomb, this time inside the walled section of the Covenanters’ Prison. Though the tomb had no connection with the vault of George Mackenzie, it seemed to generate the same unease. Sometimes a rapping sound coming from the interior would startle passing visitors. The tomb had an iron gate which had once been sealed, though the padlock had now vanished, and it was plain to see that there was nothing inside to make any such noise. Visitors, however, preferred to look into the darkness beyond the gate rather than enter, for the centre of the tomb seemed unnaturally cold, far more so than similar vaults further down the Covenanters’ Prison. One family spotted their child giggling at the entrance to the tomb in response to ‘laughing noises’ he had heard coming from inside. Another young boy told his mother he had heard ‘something breathing’ in the darkness of the vault. Nausea and a feeling of intense cold, Alaisdair had heard, had even overcome a church member as he walked past the tomb.

Ben stood up. The shadow of the church had reached them again.

‘Could you show me this vault?’

‘Aye. It’s right over here.’

Alaisdair rose, towering a good five inches over Ben, and strode off across the grass. He lit a cigarette as he walked, blowing a puff of smoke in the direction of George Mackenzie’s ugly, squat edifice.

‘Did you know,’ he continued, ‘there are so many bodies in here that sometimes bits of them start to stick out of the ground. Did you know that?’

He pulled Ben to the side, where a small, worn headstone leaned dispiritedly against a larger neighbour.

‘See? Look at that sticking out of the ground, there. Yup. I think it’s a shinbone. Now wouldn’t something like that be spooky at night?’

‘What do you mean, at night? It’s giving me the creeps in broad daylight.’

‘Aye. But things always seem a lot worse in the dark,’ said Alaisdair, in a burst of philosophical musing. ‘You know? At night?’

‘I couldn’t agree more.’

Then they were at the gates of the Covenanters’ Prison. Ben pushed at the iron bars but they didn’t move.

‘It’s locked. I don’t remember it ever having been locked before.’

‘It’s shut all the time now. Been that way for about a month.’

‘What for?’

‘Edinburgh Council say there’s been damage to some of the tombs in there. At least . . . that’s the reason they’ve given.’

Alaisdair shrugged, putting a world of doubt into the gesture – as if Edinburgh Council, like God, moved in mysterious ways.

‘Seems a bit of a coincidence, doesn’t it?’

Ben pressed his head against the bars of the gate trying to take in as much as possible. The Covenanters’ Prison was one long, green passageway about 100 yards long and 20 yards wide, bordered by a high stone wall lined with mausoleums.

‘So which tomb is causing all the trouble?’

Alaisdair pointed.

‘That one.’

It was as square, plain and unassuming as an eighteenth-century bus shelter, looking no different from the vaults opposite or on either side, although it was one of the few to have a roof rather than being open to the elements.

‘Who’s buried there?’

Alaisdair shook his head.

‘Beats me. It’s just a family tomb. Nobody famous, I don’t think.’

He shrugged again.

‘It’s just a wee black mausoleum.’

‘Black Mausoleum. I like that.’

Alaisdair looked at his watch.

‘Listen, I better shoot off. You should think about what I said. About the tours.’

Ben shook his hand.

‘I will,’ he said. ‘I certainly will.’

A few weeks later Edinburgh Council granted Ben Scott permission to take the newly formed ‘City of the Dead’ walking tour into Greyfriars graveyard. They also provided him with a set of keys to the Covenanters’ Prison – once he had proved to them that his nightly walk was going to be comprehensively insured.





Elizabeth


Elizabeth Richardson had been on a City of the Dead Tour in March 2000. She rang a few days later to say that her eye was bloodshot and bruised. She appeared on the Heaven and Earth Show on BBC 1 in April 2000. This short interview was the only one she ever gave.

I was standing in a corner behind someone who was six feet four inches tall. I was well out of the way and nothing had touched me at all. It wasn’t until I got home that my daughter-in-law said, ‘What have you done to your eye?’

I looked in the mirror and it was completely red. After a couple of days I went to the doctor because it didn’t go away. It was still totally red and the doctor asked me if I had knocked it or anything like that. I hadn’t.



[Interviewer: So, do you think you were attacked by a ghost?]

I would call myself fairly sceptical. I like things to be proved. But I wouldn’t go back there. I wouldn’t go back at night, certainly.

I wouldn’t do it again.





The Covenanters’ Prison


On arriving at the top of the ladder with great firmness,

His heroic appearance greatly did the bystanders impress

Then Montrose asked the executioner how long his body would be suspended

Three hours was the answer, but Montrose was not the least offended.

FROM ‘THE EXECUTION OF JAMES GRAHAM, MARQUIS OF MONTROSE’, BY WILLIAM MCGONAGALL

In Greyfriars Churchyard, home to the mysterious Mackenzie Poltergeist, the number of reported encounters has dramatically increased.

BIG ISSUE MAGAZINE, SEPTEMBER 1999



In 1560, as Greyfriars was beginning the transition from garden to cemetery, Scotland was undergoing an equally fundamental transformation. The nation held strong ties with Catholic France, but their Gallic neighbours had become increasingly overbearing, while many in lowland Scotland were gripped by a religious fervour which was violently anti-Catholic. This new movement was called ‘Presbyterianism’ – a plain, democratic system of worship with no secular head.

As the alliance with France soured, Scotland’s ties with her old enemy, England, grew stronger, their ancient antagonism weakened by the fact that the English were now as anti-Catholic as the lowland Scots. This new chumminess was cemented in 1603, when James VI of Scotland inherited the English throne and became James I of Britain. While the Scots rejoiced at finally conquering their long-standing rivals, James took off for London and never came back.

This wasn’t too surprising. Being cold, poverty-stricken, violent and full of religious fanatics, Scotland wasn’t exactly a medieval Shangri-la. But this is how the minds of men work – they take their own flaws, warp them into something they can call virtue and use faith to tip the scales from fantasy into reality. Since Scotland was not a world player in any other department, its population used religious obsession as a lever to greatness, elevating the church to dizzy heights by presenting it as the God-given example to the rest of humanity.

The Scots began to believe that they and they alone had a special covenant with God.

At this time there was a great difference between the Scottish and English churches. Though both were Protestant and anti-Catholic, the Episcopalian Church of England was a reformed Catholic Church, with the king replacing the Pope as its head. Presbyterianism was a different matter. The Church of Scotland was fiercely autonomous, had no figurehead and had wiped all traces of ‘Popery’ from its kirks. To consolidate his unique and possibly precarious position as first-ever British monarch, James VI and I decided to stamp his authority on Scotland and England by whittling away the distinctions between them. Since Scotland was the smaller and poorer of the two countries, it was the one picked for a national makeover. The king’s first move was to try replacing Presbyterianism with Episcopalianism, a crafty ploy which would make him head of the Church all over Britain. The Scots weren’t having that; they felt that Episcopalianism was the first step to Catholicism being reintroduced into Scotland and they made no bones about how ticked-off they were. James quietly backed off and, when he died in 1625, he had made little headway in disestablishing Presbyterianism.

His son, Charles I, was a different kettle of fish. Charles was openly Catholic and, convinced of his absolute right to rule, immediately tried to force Scotland to accept his father’s religious changes. The lowland Scots had remained loyal to a long line of Stuart kings, despite some of these monarchs’ spectacular shortcomings, but Charles I had gone too far. You just didn’t mess with Scottish religion.

Pressure came to a head when, on 23 July 1637, an Episcopalian prayer book was read out at St Giles’ Cathedral, Edinburgh. A riot ensued which quickly escalated into a rebellion. Leading Presbyterians drew up the ‘National Covenant’, a ‘mission statement’ outlining the goals of their movement. It was an impressively long-winded document, but its message was clear and threatening: the Scots would remain loyal to Charles I only if he stopped trying to impose Episcopalianism on them. If he did not, they would fight him.

On 8 December 1638 the National Covenant was signed in Greyfriars Church, Edinburgh, witnessed by representatives from all over the country. In those days, Greyfriars churchyard still had plenty of room for bodies and the headstones were few and simple, but it is said the emerald slopes of the cemetery were obscured by 60,000 spectators. As the Covenant was read aloud to the multitudes, every right hand was raised as the crowd swore a sacred oath to uphold and defend its contents. Hour after hour nobles, tradesmen and peasants filed through the church of Greyfriars, signing copies. Some wrote ‘till death’ after their names. Others signed in blood rather than ink. Copies were dispatched around the country to be signed in towns, villages and homesteads. By the end of the year (with the exception of the Catholic Highlands) Scotland was fully Presbyterian.

For a change, these ‘Covenanters’ stressed that they had no quarrel with the English and only wanted their religion left alone, and they found sympathy in England, where many considered Charles far too Popish and tyrannical for their liking. After losing a series of battles to the Covenanters and facing a rebellion on his own doorstep, Charles agreed the Scots could have all the concessions they wanted.

It was a case of too little too late. In 1642, the English Civil War broke out and the more resolute Covenanters felt they could turn this situation to their advantage. They negotiated a treaty with Oliver Cromwell, leader of the southern rebellion, and his English Parliament. This second document, the Solemn League and Covenant, offered military help to Cromwell in return for Scottish Presbyterianism being established, not just in Scotland, but throughout the whole of Britain. It was an ambitious, over-zealous move and it spelt doom for the Covenanters. Charles had already given the Scots the religious concessions they wanted and many Covenanting nobles thought they were now going back on their word. Feeling he had betrayed his king, the Marquis of Montrose – one of the main Covenanter leaders – switched sides and began a Royalist insurrection in Scotland. Leading a small band of Irish Catholics and Highlanders, he scored six successive victories over his former allies until he was betrayed, defeated and beheaded outside St Giles’ Cathedral.

Although Montrose was beaten, the Covenanters were baffled by what had happened. How could they lose battles? They were God’s soldiers, for God’s sake! Yet they had never become a decisive military presence in England either and, as Charles neared total defeat, the English parliament refused to honour the Presbyterian demands. Crippled by English betrayal and inner divisions, the Covenanting movement began to collapse.

Then, in 1650, Oliver Cromwell and the English parliament executed the captured Charles I, to the horror of even the staunchest of Presbyterians. The Stuarts were an ancient line of Scottish kings and the English couldn’t go around chopping their heads off, no matter what they had done. The new Covenanter leader, Argyll, immediately crowned the beheaded monarch’s son, Charles II, though he kept the young king a virtual prisoner while the Covenanters moulded him into a good Presbyterian. Cromwell retaliated by occupying Scotland and forcing Charles into nine years of exile.

Oliver Cromwell died in 1660. He had turned out to be far too puritanical for the British population, who were happy to re-establish the monarchy before they expired of boredom. Charles II, determined never to be a pawn again, immediately had Argyll executed and set about destroying what was left of the Covenanting movement. Secure in a position of power his father and grandfather had never enjoyed, Charles II (also a secret Catholic) forcibly brought Episcopalianism back to Scotland. He outlawed the once proud Covenanters, who were now forced to hold their religious services in hiding or at remote locations. But they were not yet defeated. In 1672 they murdered the Archbishop of St Andrews, a defector from the Presbyterian side to the Episcopalian one, defeated Royal troops at the Battle of Drumclog and began to assemble for one last desperate battle at Bothwell Bridge, on the River Clyde.

The Covenanters didn’t stand a chance. They were outnumbered, ill-disciplined, bickering amongst themselves and poorly armed and equipped. In the ensuing rout 400 Presbyterians died and around 1,200 were taken prisoner. They were bound two by two and dragged the breadth of Scotland to Edinburgh, where they were greeted by mobs jeering ‘Where’s your God now?’

Edinburgh council faced a unique problem. There were suddenly 1,200 prisoners crammed into a city which was one of the most overcrowded in Europe. Also, Edinburgh wasn’t exactly the hub of polite civilisation – the city jails were already filled to overflowing. The official solution was effective, if typically savage; the prisoners were herded into Greyfriars churchyard and locked in the south-west section. There was no shelter in this large walled yard, not even a covering to keep out the rain, and yet they were held there for five months. Penned like animals, the Covenanters slept on the cold winter ground and snipers were posted to shoot any of them heard moving around at night. They were poorly fed and forbidden contact with any friends in the city who might dare show them comfort.

As the months passed, the number of prisoners decreased. Some were set loose after giving a pledge that they would never bear arms against their king again. A few of the luckier, or more resourceful, prisoners escaped by befriending the guards or climbing over the graveyard wall. The less fortunate ones succumbed to the elements, hunger or disease and died where they lay. By mid-November there were only 257 occupants left in what had become known as the ‘Covenanters’ Prison’ – and their misery, if it were possible, was about to increase.

Early one morning they were marched from Greyfriars graveyard to Leith docks, where a ship named the Crown awaited them; the Privy Council of Edinburgh had decided that the remaining Covenanters were to be deported to the West Indies and sold as slaves. All 257 unfortunate souls were crammed into a stinking, black hold not large enough to hold 100 men. Those who were well enough stood to allow the sick and dying the last poor solace of lying on the rough deck floor. Their meat was tainted and fresh water was scarce. One Covenanter, James Corson, wrote to his wife:

All the troubles we met since Bothwell were not to be compared to one day in our present circumstances. Our uneasiness is beyond words. Yet the consolations of God overbalance all: and I hope we are near our port and heaven is open for us.



He was a lot closer to heaven than he realised. Off the coast of Orkney the Crown ran into a massive storm. The captain fastened chains over the hatches that held the terrified, vomiting prisoners and tried to reach calmer waters closer to shore.

He miscalculated. At ten o’clock the jagged rocks off the Orkney shore loomed out of the darkness and the ship broke its back on them. The sailors toppled the mast over the side and used it like a bridge to reach the beach but the Covenanters, locked in the darkness of the flooded hold, could not follow. Fewer than sixty managed to reach the safety of the shore as the Crown shattered into pieces. The other 200 vanished into the black waters.

It seemed the Covenanters’ God had finally deserted them.

The tattered remnants of the once powerful movement were now hunted men and the 18 years that followed became known as the ‘Killing Times’. Though the exact figure will never be known, it is estimated that 18,000 men, women and even children died in a policy of ruthless intimidation that stretched the length and breadth of Scotland.

One man was responsible, more than any other, for this mass extermination – the king’s Advocate in Scotland.

His name was George Mackenzie.





Rachael


Written statement by Rachael Darrow, who entered the Covenanters’ Prison on 1 September 2000:

My name is Rachael Darrow and I grew up in Janesville, Wisconsin, USA. Currently I am in college at the University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire studying psychology and plan to attend graduate school to gain a PhD in counselling. I am 21 years old and was studying in England when my experience happened.

I went on a night tour to Greyfriars graveyard with friends. In the Covenanters’ Prison I felt extremely faint and started breathing rapidly. I do not get scared easily, so I don’t know why I had this reaction. While we were walking toward the tomb [the Black Mausoleum] which we were all going to enter, I felt as if it were suddenly getting colder. I did not think much of it, because it was a chilly night, but as soon as we entered the room I began to shake uncontrollably. I ended up having to brace myself against the wall, shaking and hyperventilating – I felt I could not breathe properly. I felt better the moment we were allowed to leave the area. This was a very strange thing to happen to me because I have never fainted in my life and have never felt that way before or since.

The next day I had a welt above my left eye which did not go away for about two weeks.

The experience will stay with me forever.





‘Bloody’ George


The mausoleum in which he lies in the Greyfriars Churchyard, a domed edifice with ornate Corinthian columns and niches, is believed by the urchins of the city to be haunted still, as it was commonly believed that his body could never rest in its grave. Hence it used to be deemed a ‘brag’ or feat, for a boy more courageous than his fellows to shout through the keyhole into the dark and echoing tomb,

‘Bluidy Mackenzie, come out if ye daur,

Lift the sneck, and draw the bar!’

after which defiance all fled, lest the summoned spirit might appear, and follow them.

JAMES GRANT, CASSELL’S OLD AND NEW EDINBURGH(1880–1883)

Greyfriars is the most haunted place you’ll find in Edinburgh.

HUGH WILLIAMS, RADIO 1, APRIL 2000



For a man who gained notoriety persecuting Covenanters, George Mackenzie had a rather surprising past. Before becoming Charles II’s Advocate in Scotland, Mackenzie had actually shown great zeal in defending the very movement he ended up destroying. When the Covenanter leader, the Marquis of Argyll, was tried for treason in 1660, Mackenzie was one of the advocates who defended him. A year later he turned up on the side of another major Covenanter, James Guthrie, and five years later fought in the courts to try to free Presbyterian prisoners taken after their defeat at the battle of Rullion Green.

Born in Dundee in 1636, George Mackenzie was educated at Kings College, Aberdeen, and proved to be an intelligent and liberal thinker. He wrote many acclaimed legal texts, challenged the ignorant persecution of so-called witches and founded the Advocates Library, which eventually became the National Library of Scotland. But George Mackenzie was an aristocrat and an Episcopalian, accepting the divine right of the Stuart kings and believing that the Covenanters were dangerous and wrong. Once properly established in his profession, it was no longer necessary for Mackenzie to show off his skills by defending the Presbyterian movement.

It was at this point that the strange transformation of George Mackenzie began. He turned to speaking out against the Covenanters and eventually began persecuting them. By the time he became Lord Advocate of Scotland in 1677, Mackenzie’s fervour had transformed into obsession, and he had changed from a compassionate liberal to a tyrant who fervently sought the destruction of the Presbyterian movement.

Mackenzie formed a cruel alliance with the military commander John Graham of Claverhouse. Mackenzie condemned the Covenanters from the judges’ bench, using every official trick he knew and resorting to torture or duplicity whenever his legal channels failed. Claverhouse carried out the dirty work, hunting down and executing Covenanters in the field and earning himself the nickname ‘Bluidy Clavers’ to match the gory moniker of his partner in crime. It is ironic that history records Mackenzie as metamorphosing from a liberal into a monster, for Claverhouse would undergo a reverse transformation, eventually becoming famous as the heroic ‘Bonnie Dundee’. Between 1684 and 1688, however, the atrocities committed towards the Covenanters by Claverhouse and Mackenzie reached a horrific peak – this period became known as the ‘Killing Times’. Presbyterians were hunted down by men with bloodhounds, spies were hired to join their numbers then betray them and soldiers had permission to shoot on the spot anyone refusing to swear allegiance to the king. Yet such was the power of their faith that many Covenanters, men and women, died rather than betray their convictions.

In 1685, Charles II died and was succeeded by his brother James Stuart. James VII had no more love for Presbyterianism than his brother but while Charles II had been secretly Catholic, James reopened old wounds in Britain by admitting to his Catholic beliefs and pushing for more religious tolerance. It seemed a decent thing on the surface but aroused the fury of a nation who saw just what James was up to. More religious tolerance for everybody meant more religious tolerance for Catholics, whose fortunes at this point in British history had sunk so low that they could not even hold any positions of office. If all religions were allowed equal rights, James could begin to put his Catholic friends into influential posts once more – and everyone knew it.

Presbyterians were still hounded by the king’s men and shunned, through fear or ignorance, by the rest of the Scots, but no group aroused hatred like the Catholics. Though the persecution of the Covenanters carried blithely on, Catholics in Scotland, protected by James VII, began to flourish. Catholic schools were established, popish ecclesiasticals brought in from the continent and honours bestowed on men who sought the king’s favour by suddenly declaring that they’d actually been Catholics all along.

It was the end of the road for the ‘bluidy’ double act of Mackenzie and Claverhouse. George Mackenzie resigned in disgust at the new royal policy while John Graham stayed loyal to his king. When James VII was deposed because of his beliefs, Claverhouse earned his place in Scots legend by giving his life in a doomed attempt to put the exiled monarch back on the throne.

James VII’s successor, William, would have been quite happy to maintain Episcopalianism in Scotland, but a great deal of the Episcopal clergy there had been appointed by, and remained loyal to, James. The simplest way to get rid of them was to restore Presbyterianism to Scotland – and that’s just what William did.

After over half a century of fighting, Presbyterianism was handed to Scotland on a plate. It was just a shame there were hardly any Covenanters left to celebrate the fact.

Sir George Mackenzie lived long enough to witness his great crusade grind to a shuddering halt. With his career in ruins, he spent his last night in Scotland sitting amongst the graves in Greyfriars cemetery lamenting his fate. He died in 1691, just in time to see the Stuart line end and Presbyterianism become the religion of his country. He was buried in a great mausoleum in Greyfriars, probably the most imposing vault in the cemetery, right next to the Covenanters’ Prison and just yards from where the National Covenant was signed. Close to his tomb is the headstone of his mortal enemy, Alexander Henderson, the minister who drew up the National Covenant. (On close inspection visitors can still find musket-ball holes from the days when the king’s troops would use his headstone for target practice.) Farther down the hill, against the graveyard wall, is the ‘Martyr’s Monument’, celebrating the bravery of those Mackenzie destroyed. The inscription on the monument reads:

From May 27th 1661 that the noble Marquess of Argyle suffered to the 17th of Febr. 1688 that Mr James Ranwick suffered, were executed at Edinburgh about a hundred of Noble Gentlemen Ministers & others noble martyres for JESUS CHRIST.

The most part of them lie here.



The Covenanter’s story may have ended in Greyfriars graveyard, but George Mackenzie’s legend did not. As the years passed, tales of strange occurrences happening around his dark and sinister tomb began to circulate. Greyfriars was to be the site of as much horror in the future as it had seen in its Covenanting past, causing its haunted reputation to grow with the centuries.

The first weight had been added to the balance. It would shift Greyfriars graveyard from a place of eternal rest to a site where the dead refused to lie still.





Jan


Written statement by Jan Adamson-Reese, who was in Greyfriars Churchyard on the night of 20 May 2000:

How would you react if someone told you they’d had a paranormal experience? Would you be sceptical? Gasp in horror? Laugh uproariously? Think it was a load of old codswallop? If someone had asked me the same question 12 months ago, I’d have made interested noises at the time and had a good giggle afterwards. But something happened to me in May 2000 which changed all that . . .

The tour began outside St Giles’ Cathedral on the Royal Mile at 10 p.m., and there I was, tagging along with a crowd of 30 holidaymakers and tourists of all ages and nationalities, preparing to be led round the back streets of Edinburgh on a historical tour which culminated with a visit to Greyfriars Kirkyard.

As we drew nearer the flight of steps leading up to the ancient kirkyard, the tour guide, Ben, asked for our attention and advised us that we were entering the graveyard at our own risk . . . that he could in no way be held responsible for any eventualities and that we were at liberty to back out at that point if we wished to do so. The whispers started up immediately: ‘Do you think anything’ll happen?’, ‘Oh, my God, it’s so scary’, ‘Are we gonna go through with this?’ I’ve got to say I found it all highly amusing.

As we mounted the dark steps leading into the graveyard, the 30-strong crowd became strangely silent and moved closer together, away from the shadows. At the other side of the graveyard lay the Covenanters’ Prison, kept locked day and night with a heavy chain and padlock. I had heard stories about the existence of a poltergeist, and read newspaper articles about individuals who had been attacked or experienced some other inexplicable sensation. I was also giggling like mad, because a large number of people were getting extremely nervous. Couldn’t they see that the entire thing was a huge charade, a complete fabrication, dreamed up to con unsuspecting tourists???

The guide swung the heavy iron gates aside to let us through. Was it my imagination, or did the air become distinctly chilly as we walked into the prison? Good grief, I was getting as bad as the rest of them!

The deeper we were led into the prison, the quieter everyone became. We stopped outside the Black Mausoleum, the crowd huddling together. I was standing at the edge of the group, a little apart from the others. The guide began to speak. At that moment, I felt the oddest sensation on the back of my head – a light, cold sensation, as though someone was tracing a pattern on my scalp with one finger. Instinctively, I turned round. There was no one standing beside me, no one within arm’s reach. I touched my scalp. Weird! No trees around either, so it couldn’t have been a branch. I was unsettled, but not overly concerned.

Then we were led into the tomb itself. It was pitch black, with a faint, musty smell. As we huddled together at the back of the tomb, listening to what the guide was saying, all of a sudden I felt violently sick . . . I could feel the nausea rising in my throat and it took a tremendous effort to remain standing upright. I was convinced I was either going to faint or throw up all over the backpacker standing in front of me. This intense wave of nausea continued for a minute or two. I was fighting it the entire time, but once we were led out of the tomb again into the cool night air, I felt instantly better.

But something wasn’t quite right.

Putting my hands up to touch my face, I realised with a shock that I had lost all feeling there. It was as though I had received a particularly effective anaesthetic at the dentist, numbing it completely. The rest of my body was at normal temperature, but my face was stone cold. This feeling lasted, incredibly, for almost half an hour.

I have been back to Greyfriars on a number of occasions since, even taking part in a couple of television interviews about the poltergeist there. One film crew wanted to interview me standing in the tomb, and it proved very unsettling, as I was affected in exactly the same way – my face grew cold and lost all sensation. I’m afraid I didn’t stay there much longer.

On another occasion, the morning after I’d taken part in an interview in the churchyard, I woke to find three red marks on my skin, two on my abdomen and one on my leg. They resembled burns but were not painful. All had disappeared within 24 hours.





Mackenzie Mark I


People complained of mysterious attacks. They reported being bitten or scratched or having their hair pulled when no one else seemed to be around. Some felt strangely cold on warm days, while others reported that fires started for no apparent reason. Now an American Paranormal expert believes Mackenzie was to blame for these incidents – and that he has returned with a vengeance after three years . . .

Parapsychologist R.D. Slaither noticed activity similar to that previously experienced in the Niddry Street vaults in the Covenanters’ Prison next to Mackenzie’s grave in Greyfriars Kirkyard.

‘Is this graveyard the home of Edinburgh’s scariest poltergeist?’

EDINBURGH EVENING NEWS, 3 JULY 1999

It has the reputation of being the most haunted spot in the most haunted city in Britain. And now that I stand here, it’s extremely spooky and very atmospheric. 100 per cent belief.

ROSS KELLY, GOOD MORNING TELEVISION, MARCH 2000



Edinburgh has quite a reputation. It’s beautiful city – one of the most breathtaking in Europe – but it is also a city of duality, of dark and hidden things. The cramped and gnarled aspect of the medieval Old Town looms over the spacious Georgian New Town. Conservationists war with developers over whether a twelfth-century castle is more attractive to visitors than a Harvey Nicks. As the tourist capital of Scotland, the city extends the hand of friendship to visitors across the globe – but homegrown louts, safe in their numbers and drunk on their own warped nationalism, still chant racist slogans from the darkness at passers-by whose accents do not match their own.

The heart of this glory and decay is the Old Town, where hidden bridges and sudden drops mangle the narrow streets, making it easy to lose oneself even in that tiny twisted area. It is Edinburgh’s black heart, and it certainly seems to have more than its fair share of ghosts. There are reasons for this. For one thing, the Old Town retains enough of its historic visage to give a good idea of what it looked like in past centuries. In fact, many of the buildings pull off their ‘ancient’ look simply by being grubby and oddly shaped. They fire the imagination anyway.

The Old Town has a long and gory history. It pretty much was Edinburgh for many centuries and remained medieval long after the rest of the continent had cleaned up its act. For over 200 years Edinburgh was also one of the most overcrowded cities in Europe. Life in the capital was very cheap, and death was frequent and bloody.

In the summer the city is crammed with foreign visitors who want history, now, and lots of it. The best way to bring that history to life is to have it hanging around, even after the developers have had their way. If an ale house frequented by Black Dugald McNasty has been turned into a theme bar, there’s no reason why Black Dugald himself can’t still pop up now and then to haunt the ladies’ toilet – it gives the place a bit of historical context at a fraction of the price it would cost to preserve the original building. A particularly popular ghost can be wide-ranging, allowing different establishments to gain from the benefit of its presence. A little drummer boy, for instance, is supposed to haunt a hidden passage running the length of the Royal Mile, which gives him licence to spice up just about any premise he wants.

The Old Town, if the stories are to be believed, is positively overrun with supernatural denizens. In a space a mile long and less than a few hundred yards wide you can encounter the phantom piper, the phantom bloodstain, the Watcher, the phantom marchers, the phantom drummer, the headless drummer, the ghost of Mrs Guthrie, the death coach, the white lady, little Sarah, the Wizard of the West Bow, Shadowjack Henry, the kitchen boy of Queensbury house, The Imp, The Ghost of Holyrood Palace, the spectre of Ramsay Gardens, and the unfortunately named Hanged Horace.

With more spirits than a Polish vodka bar, the fact that you don’t see an Old Town Ghost on any particular day would seem to be a talking point. But the Royal Mile ghosts have the same elusive quality as its parking spaces – there are always thousands of people on the lookout, but nobody ever spots one. In the past, this didn’t seem to be the case. The Victorians, for instance, couldn’t get five minutes’ peace without falling over a ghost. So what has changed? Have all the spectres left town?

The truth is that ghost stories, like all good tales, grow grander with each telling until the truth is only a small thread in the fabric of their tapestry. In the Old Town, the famous ‘ghosts’ of Mary King’s Close, for instance, owe their existence to a book called Satan’s Invisible World, published in 1685 by George Sinclair, Professor of Moral Philosophy at Glasgow University. This medieval bestseller painted the unfortunate street as a hotbed of supernatural activity and it retains that reputation. The fact that Sinclair made the whole thing up has been conveniently forgotten.

As the centuries march on and science claims a tighter and tighter hold on the beliefs of the Western world, the number of new ghosts grows smaller. Edinburgh may have more than its fair share of spooks, but then Edinburgh has more than its fair share of heavy drinkers. Even the tourists are no longer as gullible. A 1990 Gallup poll of adult Americans showed that only 35 per cent believed in ghosts – roughly the same percentage as those who believed in the lost continent of Atlantis, and about half those who believed in Noah’s flood.

Occasionally, however, a new phantom in town causes a flicker of doubt among the sceptics. In 1957 the ‘Hazeldean Poltergeist’ hit the headlines of the Edinburgh newspapers. That spring, No. 5 Hazeldean Terrace seemed to have become a focus for poltergeist activity. A wooden chopping board was frequently propelled across the room, mugs and cups broke in two and the family were kept awake by unexplained banging noises coming from the kitchen. The phenomenon lasted about two years before tailing off but attracted nationwide media attention at the time.

In Niddry Street, Edinburgh, in 1994, there appeared to be another spate of poltergeist activity. Niddry Street is a short, narrow thoroughfare dipping steeply from Edinburgh’s Royal Mile into the Cowgate. On one side is the impressive presence of the Crowne Plaza Hotel, while the other side of the street contains decaying tenements and is dotted with nightclubs, pubs and old bridge vaults. In the past, Niddry Street had the usual hotch-potch of ghosts boasted by every ancient wynd in Edinburgh. A featureless man in a frock coat was often seen in one of the pubs – surely a new use for the term ‘off your face’ – the hotel had a reputation for ‘strange occurrences’ and the hostel next door had a ghost in the laundry room. None of this was out of the ordinary in the Old Town. Just round the corner was the ghost of a woman knifed to death in 1916 and a bunch of spectral children who died in the plague of 1645. But between 1994 and 1996, Niddry Street seemed to be haunted by an entity that was different from the run-of-the-mill spooks. People in the street complained of inexplicable drops in temperature. The area was plagued by fires. Passers-by felt nauseous or suddenly terrified for no apparent reason; some even collapsed. These events were strikingly similar to those that would take place in Greyfriars Graveyard five years later. Was there some connection?

Perhaps there was more than one.

Ben Scott was working as a tour guide at that time and his walk began and ended each night in Niddry Street. He bade goodnight to his party outside a pub that employed a young barman named David Pollock. David Pollock had never heard of the Mackenzie Poltergeist and would not for a few more years. But his life and the life of the poltergeist would become entwined in a way he could not have imagined.

In 1996, Ben Scott stopped taking tours into Niddry Street and David Pollock moved to another bar in another street. When they did, the paranormal occurrences in Niddry Street faded away. There were no more cold spots. Nobody collapsed. The poltergeist, if that was indeed what it was, had gone.

And the third connection? The Crowne Plaza was built on the site of Strichen’s Close, another victim of twentieth-century developers after surviving for half a millennium.

Strichen’s Close had been the home of the illustrious George Mackenzie.





Kyle


Statement given by Kyle Plackmeyer from Maryville, Missouri, a radio operator on a cruise ship. Mr Plackmeyer encountered the Mackenzie Poltergeist on 14 July 2000.

When it is possible to explain away an incident by natural, or sometimes clever human, origins, I do my best to do so. I took the City of the Dead tour after exhausting the other ‘ghost tours’ of Edinburgh. I saw Mary King’s Close and some of the other reported haunted places and did not register anything. The cemetery tour was the second to last night of my week vacation before I went to the Open at St Andrews and then back to the cruise ship I work on. I expected only a good story then maybe a night in the pub. I did not drink beforehand though and I was in the mindset for light-hearted fun, not sombreness.

The tour gave a wonderful account of Edinburgh’s gritty past and the excitement mounted as we neared Greyfriars. I felt a tinge of anticipation that something might happen, but it was in the back of my mind for the most part. The stories continued as we entered the mausoleum which is reported to be the active area. Our guide continued speaking and I was in what I would call starboard aft of the structure, if you don’t mind nautical terminology.

My incident occurred about one or two minutes after entering. I stood listening at the back of the crowd when, without hearing voices or any of the other phenomena reported, I felt something I have never encountered before. Hopefully, I will never feel it again. It was akin to having someone wrap a black cloak of ice around me. It was hard to breathe and became very cold, very quickly. It was not like a breeze though. The air was quite still and just dropped dramatically. I began to black out. I remembered the guide’s advice that if something strange happened, to move. I tried to step away, but continued to feel frozen and unable to draw a breath, like a deer in headlights, totally fixed in place. I finally forced myself to jump. Though it only took about four seconds or so for the entire ordeal, it passed slowly, and I recall vividly the sickening feeling in my stomach.

Out of the entire group, only the lady standing next to me looked at me. Maybe she thought I was trying to be cute with an attempt at scaring everyone by a sudden movement. I only wish that to be true. I’m not sure if the guide noticed or if he just let it go without trying to shake everyone else up. Usually cool-headed, I now had an acute case of the shakes. I wanted to leave but honestly was too frightened to move without the rest of the group. As the tour ended, many people went together to a nearby pub, which was my original intent of my evening. I passed on this, went back to my lodgings and had a hard time falling asleep without reflecting on the evening.

The next morning, I saw the guide walking down the street. I told him my story and also told him that I had said nothing the previous evening because I did not want to stop until I was well away from the activity’s location. He gave me the company’s phone number and I subsequently gave them my story and address.





Dawn of The Dead


Elaine Weyman, 34, an administrator for a large insurance company, claimed she had been attacked by the ghost three weeks ago. Although she only felt ‘chilly’ in the tomb, when she woke up next day she had bruising around her neck – as if ‘something’ had grabbed her from behind.

‘Tourists feel force of phantom menace’

EDINBURGH EVENING NEWS, 6 NOVEMBER 1999



Ben Scott sat in Bannerman’s Bar with his friends, many of whom were also guides. He had decided to wait until they had drunk a significant amount before springing his idea on them.

‘Listen. I’m starting a walking tour. A ghost tour. Who wants to come? All we need is a little money to start off . . .’

His enthusiasm was not reciprocated. The other guides knew that Edinburgh already had plenty of ghost tours. It didn’t need another one.

‘But we’ll be better than the competition. I’m good at this.’

His friends didn’t disagree. Ben knew how to tell a story. The problem was that the competition was too big for any small company to even get a foothold. Ben tried his pièce de résistance.

‘Ah. But I’ve got a real ghost. Apparently.’

His friends shook their heads.

‘Aye,’ Ben agreed. ‘That sounded stupid, even to me.’

Ben’s ex-girlfriend Kate Kavanagh, also a tour guide, was sitting at his right-hand side. At 27, Kate was ten years younger than Ben and several inches shorter. While Ben’s accent had a soft, almost imperceptible, Scottish lilt, Kate had a broad Yorkshire accent. Slim, with shoulder-length auburn hair, Kate was striking and fiery-tempered. Deep in conversation with the girl across the table, she hadn’t appeared to be listening. Now she turned and lit a cigarette.

‘How much are we talking about?’

Ben spun round to face her.

‘Not much. Money to make a few signs advertising the tour. Cash to print some leaflets. What else do we need?’

‘A miracle,’ someone suggested.

‘I’ve got some money,’ Kate said, and turned back to her conversation.

‘There,’ said Ben. ‘That’s miracle number one. Who wants a drink? It’s my round.’

‘That’s miracle number two!’

The dire predictions almost came true – the newly formed City of the Dead tour didn’t exactly make an immediate impact. People enjoyed the historical stories and laughed at the jokes. Ben knew how to write a good script, both he and Kate knew how to give a performance and Greyfriars was suitably forbidding at night. But, as their friends had frequently commented, there were plenty of similarly themed tours in Edinburgh – the bigger companies, regardless of how good they were, could afford mass advertising and had cornered the market.

Then Kate met R.D. Slaither.

It was a grey day, despite being June, and the cemetery looked like it was filtered through monochrome or, perhaps, turning to dust. Kate had gone to the Covenanters’ Prison to put a new padlock on the Black Mausoleum as the old one seemed to have vanished. She didn’t like the Covenanters’ Prison. Ben strolled in and out of the place quite happily, but Kate was reluctant to enter it even during the day. It wasn’t so much the fear factor, though it was certainly scary at night. It was more that the small strip of land seemed to carry an air of sadness. It was a melancholy place, like Glencoe or Culloden, a place where the atrocities carried out many years ago seemed to linger. Ben felt none of this and had remarked several times that it would be a great spot to have a picnic.

Kate was locking the gate behind her when she heard a movement to her left and a dark shape flitted into the corner of her eye.

‘Jesus Christ Almighty!’ Dragging the chain from the gate, she whirled to face the intruder with a speed that would have impressed Bruce Lee.

A tall, white-haired man stood in front of her, hands in pockets. He was dressed casually but smartly and had the air of a man who knew how to wear clothes well. His face was tanned and wrinkled, but it was a face that wore the mark of travel rather than age. Kate was sure she recognised him.

‘I don’t know if you recognise me,’ the man smiled disarmingly. ‘I was on your tour last night.’ His accent was odd; it seemed to be a mixture of Scots and American. ‘Name’s R.D. Slaither.’ The man held out his hand. ‘I wondered if I might have a word with you.’

Kate looked around to see if there was anyone else in the graveyard and was relieved to see a couple walking arm in arm less than 100 yards away. She relaxed her grip on the chain and shook R.D. Slaither’s hand.

‘What can I do for you?’

‘I’m a parapsychologist,’ said Slaither. Kate tightened her grip on the chain again.

‘Don’t worry,’ said Slaither. ‘I’m not loopy. I investigate so-called psychic phenomena, true, but I think most of it is fake, or has a valid scientific explanation. Still . . . that’s what I’m interested in. I came on your tour last night.’

‘You’re investigating our tour?’

Slaither smiled. He had an open, likeable smile.

‘Hell no. I’m here for the weekend – I just had nothing better to do. But I wanted to ask you about something.’

‘What would you like to know?’ Kate sat on one of the stone grave borders and felt for her cigarettes.

‘How long have these tours been going?’

‘Not long. About a month. Month and a half.’

‘Do people get scared?’

‘Well, yes. It’s a ghost tour.’

‘Yes. I enjoyed it.’

Slaither sat on the border beside her.

‘You ever heard of a thin place?’

Kate looked blank, puzzled by his sudden change of tack.

‘No. What is it?’

‘According to folklore, a thin place is a place where the dividing line between this world and – I don’t know, the spirit world, call it what you like – is very thin. Balquidder, up near Callander, is supposed to be a thin place. Where Rob Roy McGregor used to live.’

Slaither looked straight ahead, as if peering into this other world, or perhaps just seeing Balquidder again.

‘I went there once. I’m very good at, I don’t know, “sensing” things. Call it what you like. That’s why I do what I do.’

‘Did you sense anything in Balquidder?’

‘Hell no. Very pretty though. A lot of silver birch. Nice type of tree.’

He shook his head and laughed.

‘Spirit world. No. Lot of nonsense.’

Despite Slaither’s pleasant demeanour, Kate was beginning to wish she hadn’t put the chain down. She looked around, but the courting couple were nowhere to be seen.

‘Why do you end the tour in that tomb?’

‘What tomb?’

‘The tomb you end the tour in.’ Slaither smiled again, but now Kate was watching his eyes. She couldn’t tell whether they were friendly or not; they didn’t reveal anything.

‘We heard it was haunted. Thought it would be the perfect place to finish.’ Kate looked around again.

‘It is.’

‘Yes. It’s very atmospheric. You saw how scared people were.’

‘I mean, yes. It is haunted. Well . . . not exactly haunted – I don’t really believe in that nonsense. But you got something in there. I felt it.’

Despite her nervousness, Kate couldn’t resist arching one shapely eyebrow. Slaither smiled again, and once again he seemed friendly and harmless.

‘I know. Sounds dumb. Let’s just say, I’ve been to a lot of places. I’ve seen a lot of so-called paranormal occurrences. Most of them were all smoke and mirrors.’

His smile faded.

‘But now and then I come across something. I get this feeling. I sense something. And I have never sensed it stronger than in that tomb.’

‘Is it . . . dangerous?’ Kate tried to sound nonchalant.

‘Hell, yes.’

Slaither stood up.

‘Won’t stop you dong the tours though, will it?’

Kate gave a little smile as she, too, stood. She shook her head.

‘Hell no.’

Slaither stretched out his hand again.

‘Good. Good. I’ll be back to check on this one. Good luck.’

They shook hands once again and R.D. Slaither turned and strolled off towards the graveyard exit. Kate picked up the padlock, walked over to the gate and wrapped the chain around it. She glanced back, but by now R.D. Slaither was almost out of the main gate. For the first time she noticed he was limping.

As she clicked the padlock shut, she suddenly felt very cold.

‘Jesus. It doesn’t take much to give me the creeps,’ she said, more to fill the sudden silence than anything else.

She never saw R.D. Slaither again.

The next week 11-year-old Megan Billingsly, visiting from Leeds, came on the City of the Dead tour. Once the walk had ended she complained to her mother that something she couldn’t see had ‘clawed her hand’ in the Black Mausoleum.

In the light from the streetlamps the astonished tour party could see four deep gouges running across the back of her arm.





Joy


Statement by Joy Frazer who spent the summer of 2000 visiting ghost tours around the country and analysing them from a folkloristic perspective:

Of the tours that I have studied, City of the Dead is most definitely located at the fear-inducing end of the spectrum. The company first caught my attention with its promise to offer its audiences the experience of being ‘locked in a graveyard at night with an active poltergeist’. Although most ghost tours incorporate (or purport to incorporate) an experience that is in some way ‘supernatural’, none report such experiences with the frequency, and seriousness, of those described by participants on this company’s tours.

Secondly, I was interested in the emphasis placed by the tour company on the genuineness and potential harmfulness of this promised supernatural encounter. This emphasis continues throughout the tour itself; as Ben informed one tour party of which I was a member, ‘Whether or not you believe in this kind of thing is now immaterial . . . [It] is real and I do warn you of that now.’

A series of gates through which the tour party passes on its way to the Black Mausoleum are first unlocked to allow the audience members to pass through, and then locked again behind them, simultaneously creating the contradictory impressions of privileged access and entrapment. It is an exciting and fear-inducing combination. On one tour I attended, once his audience had crammed into the mausoleum, Ben further reinforced the sense of entrapment by closing the gate from the outside and making as if to walk away. When this action was met with expressions of genuine alarm from his audience he returned, only to inform them that the zone in which the poltergeist was most likely to attack was also their only possible escape route; the doorway of the tomb itself.

During the summer of 2000 I attended the tour on six occasions, surely making me its greatest fan! Each time the experience became more, not less, frightening. However, for all that they use their power as intermediaries to manipulate the emotions of the audience, the guides themselves are not exempt from the dangers involved in conducting tours to the Black Mausoleum. In fact, on a tour I attended on 29 July 2000, led by another guide, it was obvious that his considerable fear was not simply part of the performance. This fear was quickly communicated to the audience, and despite his urging us to ‘stay light-hearted’, that we were ‘here to have fun’, several audience members chose to leave the tour before it entered the Covenanters’ Prison and fun was the last thing on most of our minds. Speaking for myself, I have rarely been so afraid, and it seemed that our fears were not unfounded.

After the tour, I spoke with a fellow audience member, Charity Pirkle, who professed to having been ‘scared half to death’ by a paranormal experience on the tour. Charity’s description of her experience is consistent with other accounts of noises issuing from behind the walls of the mausoleum and of bruises appearing after the tour where victims have felt the sensation of being touched.





The Ghost That Haunted Itself


Laws of nature are just human inventions, like ghosts. Laws of logic, of mathematics are also human inventions, like ghosts. The whole blessed thing is a human invention, including the idea that it isn’t a human invention. The world has no existence whatsoever outside the human imagination. It’s all a ghost, and in antiquity was so recognised as a ghost, the whole blessed world we live in.

ROBERT M. PIRSIG, ZEN AND THE ART OF MOTORCYCLE MAINTENANCE

There appears to be something very spooky going on in Greyfriars Kirkyard in Edinburgh. Many visitors have reported being jostled, scratched and generally assaulted by invisible assailants. There have been cold spots, ethereal rappings and laughter and the smell of putrefaction. Visitors have felt nauseous or even passed out.

‘Ghosts gang up on the visitors to Greyfriars’

SUNDAY TELEGRAPH, 23 APRIL 2000



From the day that Kate Kavanagh met R.D. Slaither, whether it was coincidence or not, paranormal incidents seemed to come thick and fast. On 19 June 1999, Lisa Allen from Boston complained of being freezing cold while the tour party were in the Black Mausoleum. Ben Scott made several jokes about Scottish summers then watched, astonished, as the young woman fell unconscious to the ground. She woke up a few minutes later and, when questioned, insisted she had felt some kind of presence materialise next to her in the darkness immediately before she blacked out.

On 25 June 1999, Mhaile Moore from Polynesia began to panic in the darkness of the Black Mausoleum. In front of Kate and the bemused tour party, she shouted that something was pulling her by the hair. Yet nobody was standing anywhere near her – nor did they want to after that. On 1 July 1999, a tour party led by Kate heard a rumbling noise coming from the Black Mausoleum as they walked towards it. Some visitors described it as a knocking noise, while others swore it was the sound of deep laughter. Whatever they thought they heard, the party found the vault empty. On 8 July 1999, Hannah de Wolfe from Holland complained of becoming ‘suddenly very cold’ in the vault. A few seconds later she hit the ground. Ben Scott couldn’t believe his luck. Two days later, 12-year-old Charles Band from Pittsburgh told his mother that something was touching his hair in the Black Mausoleum. In the streetlight, after the tour, his mother found three blood-filled gouges on the child’s forehead. On 20 July, Elaine Weyman insisted that something was brushing her face in the vault. Outside the Black Mausoleum, the horrified tour party pointed out to Kate the cut down the back of Elaine’s neck. On 15 August 1999, a thumping began at the back of the Black Mausoleum, the temperature dipped and the tomb became so cold that several nervous visitors asked to leave. Ben led them out, protesting that he hadn’t finished his story. Five days later Siobhan Reuse from Australia complained of feeling very cold just inside the Black Mausoleum. She tried to push her way out of the vault and collapsed in the doorway. Two days later a tour party, once again, heard thumping noises coming from inside the tomb as they approached. Again, the tomb was empty.

On 1 September 1999, Elizabeth Williams from London felt something she couldn’t see touching her face in the Black Mausoleum. The next day she called to say that she had woken up with bruises around her eyes.

Ben Scott sat in Greyfriars pub with Kate. They had just hired a third tour guide, Derek, and were celebrating impending global domination.

‘We should celebrate in style,’ Ben said as he went up to the bar. ‘How about a malt whisky with lime and blackcurrant?’

‘I’ll stick to lager. You can put a slice of pineapple in it.’

Ben brought the round of drinks back to the table and though they exchanged pleasantries for a while, both knew where the conversation was going. It was Kate who began.

‘More and more weird things are happening to people on our tours.’

Ben grinned.

‘Great, huh? Maybe we should get some first-aid training.’

‘I’ve already called and made inquiries about it.’ Kate looked at Ben over the rim of her glass.

‘Well done.’

‘It’s all a bit odd, love, you have to admit.’

Ben shrugged. ‘People get nervous in that tomb. It’s all psychosomatic, you know.’

‘What about the scratches?’

‘That’s what children are like. A kid gets scared, he grabs hold of some part of himself and digs in his nails.’

‘Really? What part of yourself do you grab when you’re scared?’

Ben sipped his pint. ‘You know what I mean. The kid puts his hand up to his face, doesn’t even realise he’s scratched himself.’

‘Ben. We’ve had adults getting scratched as well.’

‘Adults are just big kids.’

‘What about the cold spots?’

‘Draughts.’

‘Thumping noises?’

‘Minor earthquakes.’ Ben scratched his chin. ‘I don’t know. It doesn’t matter, does it?’

Kate took out a tobacco tin and cigarette papers, placed them on the table and began to roll a cigarette. ‘C’mon, you’re the one who’s been reading up on all sorts of daft poltergeist theories. Have you ever read about a spook that’s as helpful as ours?’

‘Sort of. Ever heard of a ghost called Philip?’

‘No. Who was he?’

‘Nobody.’

And Ben Scott told Kate the story of the ghost that haunted itself.

In the 1970s, eight members of a Canadian group called the Toronto Society for Psychical Research embarked on an experiment. Though they had often claimed to have held successful séances, their aim was to prove that paranormal phenomena were nothing to do with the ‘spirit world’. The group believed that, given the right circumstances, so-called ‘spirits’ might actually be the subconscious creations of living humans. To illustrate their point, they decided to try and create a ghost called Philip.

The group’s scientific adviser, Dr A.R.G. Owen of the University of Toronto, stressed the artificial way in which this ghost was to be characterized: ‘It was essential to their purpose that Philip be a totally fictitious character. Not merely a figment of the imagination but clearly and obviously so, with a biography full of historical errors.’ So the team came up with a fictional character and began to concoct a life for him. They made Philip a seventeenth-century aristocratic Englishman, a Catholic and a supporter of King Charles I. He lived in Diddingstone Hall, was married to a cold, remote wife called Dorothea and was having an affair with a gypsy girl named Margo. The Society for Psychical Research were obviously better versed in Mills and Boon novels than they were in Cromwellian history. Philip’s life story was carefully plotted. Dorothea accused Margo of witchcraft, Margo was executed and Philip, afraid to jeopardise his privileged position, did nothing to prevent it. Later, in a fit of remorse, the unfortunate character killed himself.

Though the Toronto group had no illusions about how unreal Philip was – especially with a plotline like that – they went on to flesh out this imaginary cavalier with more and more intimate details. They acquired photographs of a real Diddingstone Hall in England, which they pretended was Philip’s ancestral home. They drew pictures of him, picked his favourite foods, analysed his relationships with Margo and Dorothea. They obviously had a lot of time on their hands.

What they achieved in the end was a uniform and detailed mental picture of this man. Even though he didn’t exist, they all felt they knew him. The term they used was ‘collective hallucination’.

Then the group conducted séances and used ouija boards to try and conjure Philip up. Astonishingly, it seemed to work: ‘Philip’ would answer questions from the group by rapping on their table. He answered their questions, showed likes and dislikes, had strong opinions on some subjects and was hesitant about others. As Iris Own, co-author of the book Conjuring Up Philip, put it: ‘We clearly understand and have proved that there is no ‘spirit’ behind these communications; the messages are from the group subconscious, but it is the physical force we need to know more about.’ If the experiments were to be believed, a group of eight people had managed to make their collective consciousness form an unexplained physical entity – an entity that had developed rudimentary self-awareness and was able to interact with them.

Kate thought for a while then lit her cigarette. ‘What a lot of guff.’

‘Aye,’ Ben agreed, ‘it is.’

He took her lighter and lit a cigarette of his own. A curl of grey smoke drifted up through the jukebox music and blended with the haze already floating above their heads. Kate tapped her cigarette and a few sparks drifted into Ben’s pint.

‘So you don’t think we’re doing something like that?’

‘Of course not. It’s just people’s imaginations running away with them.’

‘Just as well, eh, love?’

‘Why’s that?’

‘Well, this Philip wasn’t too bad a guy – apart from being rotten to women. You’d probably have got on well.’

‘Thanks.’

‘I mean, these people in Toronto wouldn’t try and create something they’d be afraid of, would they?’ She blew a ring of smoke and it hung in the air between them. ‘But Mackenzie’s different, eh?’

Ben saw what Kate was getting at. ‘Aye. People on the tour believe in this thing, no doubt about it, and there’s a lot more than eight of them.’

‘But they think it’s evil. If group consciousness ever brings the Mackenzie Poltergeist to life, the group’s not going to be thinking about some poncy nobleman. They’ll be picturing a monster that lives in a tomb.’

‘Wouldn’t that be nice,’ Ben grinned, sipping his pint again.

Kate arched an eyebrow, a movement Ben found cute and intimidating in equal measure. ‘No, Ben. It wouldn’t. Not when I go in there every night.’ Then she smiled mischievously ‘It’s quite good, though, eh?’

‘Oh yeah.’

Ben grinned and raised his glass. Kate clinked hers against it.

‘Aye, love. We certainly know how to scare people.’

At that point, neither Ben nor Kate considered the notion that the terror visitors felt in the Black Mausoleum might not actually be due to them.





Charity


Charity Pirkle entered the Covenanters’ Prison on 29 July 2000:

I have been to Edinburgh only once in my life and, when I told a friend of mine I was visiting, she mentioned a ‘City of the Dead Tour’ she had gone on when she was there. It sounded interesting, so I went one Saturday night with my friend Adrian. She’s from Birmingham, Alabama, and I’m from Atlanta, Georgia. We were both 17 at the time. This was sometime in July 2000.

When we started out, we were both realistic about the evening – expecting to learn some history and hear some scary stories. The tour went, we assume, as normal until we got to the Covenanters’ Prison. We all had to promise that City of the Dead was not responsible for anything that happened while we were inside, and Adrian and I got a little nervous at that. But that was why we were there, to be frightened, in a fun way. Neither of us thought that there would actually be an encounter with the Mackenzie Poltergeist.

When we walked into the Covenanters’ Prison we were kind of quiet, just looking around at the area that we had come into. I was facing Adrian, about to ask her a question, when I felt something poke me hard in my left side. I thought that I had accidentally backed into someone, but when I turned to apologise, there wasn’t anyone there! Puzzled, I nevertheless passed it off as a trick of the mind and continued walking towards the Black Mausoleum.

I didn’t want to miss any part of the tour so Adrian and I were the first in and stood toward the back of the small dark room. As our tour guide told us about the different things that had gone on in the area, Adrian and I could hear an echo coming from the back of the wall. But when he stopped speaking, I realised that the noise behind me was continuing! It seemed to be coming from the wall at about head height and continued on and off while the guide was speaking.

Adrian and I looked at each other, but right at the back and up against the wall, we seemed to be the only ones who could hear the sound. By the time we left the tomb I was scared half to death but still trying to act calm – in fact, I was the last one out of the mausoleum. Then, as I was coming out, something grabbed my right ankle – it felt like a man’s hand in a thick glove or wrapped in something very soft.

Half an hour later my ankle had a bruise running all the way round it.





Poltergeist!


Temperament, disposition, talent, environment, heredity . . . all or any of these may be involved. Some people have short tempers, others the patience of a saint. Some people work off their tensions, confusions or rage by playing squash, listening to old Gong albums, drinking whisky, or even robbing banks. Some become comedians.

Some produce poltergeists.

REUBEN STONE, ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF THE ENEXPLAINED



What exactly is a poltergeist? Everyone is familiar with the term, which is a combination of the German words poltern ‘to knock’, and geist, ‘spirit’; in other words, a ‘noisy spirit’. According to folklore, poltergeists are mischievous, and occasionally malevolent, entities that play tricks on their chosen victims and generally behave in an antisocial way. Often drops in temperature, rapping noises and unpleasant smells accompany their presence

Whatever poltergeists might be, their talents are pretty limited – they seem designed for the specific purpose of being as annoying as possible, rather like having a little brother you can’t see. Poltergeists can apparently start fires, throw or hide small objects, speak in disembodied voices and levitate things. In more severe cases, the poltergeist may shift large items of furniture and make things appear from nowhere. They seem to have happily adapted to the development of technology, causing interference in telephones and electronic equipment and turning lights and household appliances on and off. But poltergeists can have a more sinister aspect. In some cases they pinch, bite, hit, cut and even sexually attack the living.

In general poltergeist activity starts and stops abruptly and has a life span varying from hours to months, though a few of the cases reported have lasted for years. In almost 60 per cent of the cases recorded in the last two centuries, poltergeist activity took place only at night.

There are four popular explanations of what poltergeist activity might be. Those of a religious persuasion believe it is caused by an unclean spirit or a demon that has entered a victim. The poltergeist is vanquished by exorcism and, contrary to popular religious reports, exorcisms and prayer meetings to cast out unwanted demons are still commonplace in Europe and the USA. According to the church this ‘spirit’ activity is caused by so-called occult practices like ouija boards or séances, which allow a gateway for demonic entry. This explanation is losing power as civilisation takes Christianity and its doctrines less literally – the only demons that plague people these days are personal ones. But, as we shall see, ‘personal demons’ may well be the best modern explanation for poltergeist activity.

The second explanation for poltergeists is the spiritual one – the belief that the activity is caused by the spirit of a deceased person that has not moved on to the next plane of existence. According to spiritualists, a poltergeist is just a particularly physical ghost. It gets mad because it isn’t where it’s meant to be, or because it can’t come to terms with a particularly violent or sudden death, which is fair enough, really. In these cases, mediums are used to persuade the spirits to move on or simply to leave their victims alone. Though the spiritual and Christian explanations may sound theologically similar, Christian doctrine firmly specifies that communing with the dead or spirits is not divine and is therefore the work of the devil. Christianity strictly forbids ouija boards, séances and clairvoyancy, which are widely used in the Spiritual movement. Spiritualists are rather more tolerant of their differences with Christians and will seek an exorcism if they think a poltergeist case is more than they can handle.

The third explanation for poltergeists is the obvious one, and the most plausible in many cases. Some poltergeists are simply frauds. Scientific data is notoriously scarce, with a noticeable lack of photographic, electronic or audio evidence, and sensational cases such as the Amityville Horror and the Smurl Poltergeist were soon found to be engineered. Other cases, like the famous ‘Enfield Poltergeist’ which terrorised the Harper family in 1970s London, seemed to start as a genuine infestation which turned more and more fraudulent as the participants grew to like the media attention.

The final explanation is the scientific one; the belief that poltergeist activity is caused by an as yet unexplained mechanism of the human mind. This is commonly referred to as psychokinesis (PK), a theory that is gradually receiving more respect from mainstream science. After rigorous testing using accepted scientific methods, respected psychologists Hans and Michael Eysenk went as far as to state that they are certain PK exists.

Regardless of which explanation you prefer, poltergeists demonstrate a certain pattern of activity that is repeated, with variations, in almost all cases. Poltergeists usually have a ‘focus’ and their paranormal activity revolves around certain types of people. Females under the age of 20 are often triggers, as are women going through the menopause, but the focus does not have to be female. In the 1930s the psychologist Nandor Fodor advanced the theory that poltergeist disturbances were caused by humans suffering from intense repressed anger, hostility or sexual tension, regardless of their age or sex. In 1980 a poltergeist plagued a family in Somerset, England and, since the family included two teenage children, it was assumed that they were somehow the cause. In fact, it turned out to be the 49-year-old father who was the focus. Under severe pressure at work, he was suffering from depression and had become impotent. When he received medical attention for his condition the poltergeist vanished.

William Roll, project director of the Psychical Research Foundation in Durham, North Carolina pursued this theory. Starting in the 1960s, Roll studied 116 written reports of poltergeist cases spanning over four centuries in more than 100 countries. Roll’s conclusion was that these paranormal activities were the result of ‘recurrent spontaneous psychokinesis’ (RSPK); spontaneous and unexplained physical effects, often caused by a child or teenager as a way of expressing hostility without the fear of punishment. The individual was not aware of having these abilities or being the cause of such disturbances but was secretly pleased when they occurred. Other investigators have listed a catalogue of malaise associated with affected buildings or families. Poor mental and/or physical health, unresolved emotional tensions, anxiety reactions, sleepwalking, phobias, mania, obsessions, dissociative reactions and schizophrenia are all cited and in some cases therapy or medical treatment eliminated the poltergeist activity. Professor A.R.G. Owen has suggested that ‘poltergeistry’ is a conversion neurosis – the ability of certain people to convert acute anxiety into noise and the movement of objects.

An example of this is the fact that poltergeist activity in Britain frequently occurs in council houses when a new family has recently moved in. It’s easy to imagine that the trauma of such an upheaval, especially to a child who has no say in the matter, might contribute to a burst of poltergeist activity. Then again, it’s just as plausible that families could fake poltergeist activity to get rehoused in a better neighbourhood.

If poltergeists really are the product of subconscious resentment in a family member, it may explain why the poltergeist frightens or annoys other family members, yet rarely hurts them. Typical poltergeist activity seems more attention-seeking than malicious. If a poltergeist were actually to injure someone, the family might permanently vacate the building, taking away the attention that the activity seems to demand.

It would seem, however, that poltergeist activity can take place when there is no apparent human focus, or the focus is no longer present. In 1995, the Manchester Anomalous Phenomena Investigation Team investigated a poltergeist case in Rochdale, UK, where paranormal activity continued to take place even though the adolescent who seemed to be the focus and her family were removed from the premises. In 1973 it was demonstrated that a compass needle deflected by a female poltergeist victim continued to oscillate in the area where the force had been generated, even though the woman had gone. The most popular explanation for these phenomena is that psychokinetic power is triggered by psychological conditions, after which its existence is independent of the person who generated it. Traditionalists take this to mean that these people are somehow a channel for a greater force, be it demons, spirits from the great beyond or just some blind cosmic force.

Physical attack is the most sinister feature of the poltergeist. A Romanian peasant girl named Eleanora Zugen was afflicted by marks on her body whenever her particular ‘poltergeist’ was insulted and, at the slightest provocation, scratches and bite marks would appear on the girl’s face and arms. In 1980 a physicist named Dr Fleur investigated a poltergeist afflicting a family in Mulhouse, France. This poltergeist was different from typical cases in several ways: to begin with, it had already been active for three years and, rather than just being mischievous, it had become openly hostile to its own focus. Activity seemed to centre round the wife, Carla, who claimed the entity would punch her in the stomach and pinch her legs, which would then become bruised. She also developed mysterious cuts and scratches, would feel ‘cold hands’ on her neck (which left marks the next day) and the house was subject to sudden massive fluctuations in temperature. When their young son began to talk in his sleep and tell the investigators about ‘visitors’ that nobody else could see, the family sold the house and moved to the Antilles, on the other side of the world.

At first, the Mackenzie Poltergeist seemed like a standard paranormal case, displaying some typical poltergeist activities, though not all of them. There was no rapping, only a few bangs, and no movement of household objects – hardly surprising since the poltergeist wasn’t in a house. There was nothing near the tomb, in fact, for it to move. When the activity spread to surrounding houses, however, banging and movement of objects did begin. Cold spots were frequent – no small feat on a winter’s night in Scotland – victims would complain of suddenly feeling ‘freezing cold’ inside. Cuts and bruises and the sensation of being touched or grabbed were also regular occurrences. But there were major differences between the Mackenzie case and other poltergeists. Since different people entered the Covenanters’ Prison each night, it followed that the Mackenzie poltergeist couldn’t possibly have one person as a focus. If there was a focus it would have to be the guide, since the guides were the only people who entered the area every night. Spiritualists had no problem justifying their explanation. Unlike a house, the graveyard, with its terrible history, could be the site of countless restless spirits.

There was another, still more significant difference between the Mackenzie Poltergeist and other recorded cases. Every night, inside the Black Mausoleum, the tour guides deliberately brought about conditions of stress in the parties they conducted. In the blackness of a graveyard tomb – famous for having an active poltergeist – visitors listened to the guide describe exactly what this thing could do. Suddenly it was no longer a game and a whole rash of negative emotions could be elicited – emotional tension, severe anxiety, phobic or manic reaction, terror, hostility and resentment – in many cases repressed by individuals trying not to show their fear in front of friends, relatives or partners. These were optimum conditions for the creation of poltergeist activity; if you subjected a wide range of people to the same negative emotions night after night you had a scenario never seen in a paranormal case before. The Mackenzie Poltergeist may have evolved not as an entity with no human focus – but as the first case of a poltergeist with dozens of them. Enough to leave a psychokinetic residue in the tomb it inhabited – a residue that was added to by focus after focus and fed, night after night, by negative emotions.

If this were true, Mackenzie would have a freedom that other poltergeists did not enjoy. As the product of dozens of negative minds, rather than one, surrounded by strangers rather than family, it was free to attack anyone at all. Not just to pinch and scratch them, but to knock them out.

To put it in religious terms, the Mackenzie Poltergeist was legion.

At its epicentre, in the Black Mausoleum, the entity wasn’t interested in rapping out messages or moving small objects. It was a different kind of creature entirely. Time and time again, visitors insisted on leaving the tomb before their tour had finished, convinced they could feel the poltergeist’s presence. The impression it gave them was not that of a mischievous trickster who simply wanted to frighten.

It was that of a predator stalking its prey.





Gail


Statement given by Gail Baird. Gail lived for six months in one of the flats overlooking Greyfriars graveyard before moving in with her future husband.

John, the man I was seeing (and who is now my husband), used to poke fun at me when he came to visit, because I’d regale him with more and more unexplained goings-on in my flat. He is one of life’s confirmed sceptics and his being an astrophysics student at the time didn’t help. I imagine every scientist wants absolute proof of things before committing themselves. (I’m still convinced he only accepted I’d been pregnant when he changed his first nappy.)

Unexplained things happened periodically. I would leave objects in the living-room and they would reappear in the kitchen. The shower room door (which I like to keep shut, obviously) kept opening by itself. Clocks changed their times or broke. But two particular incidents completely freaked me out and made my scientifically minded husband-to-be consider the possibility that there are things that science doesn’t have an explanation for. One afternoon John arrived to see me and I was in a terrible state. I had a large collection of soft toys at the time, which I kept in a pile in the corner, on the floor. At about half past twelve I went shopping and, when I got back an hour later, my entire collection of fluffy animals had been piled in a pyramid on the bed. My heart leapt into my throat when I walked into my bedroom and saw it and I shook all day. John was convinced that I had put them there in a fit of tidying and forgotten about it. I don’t call piling animals in geometric shapes tidying up, and there is nothing wrong with my memory.

The second incident even John couldn’t explain. We arrived back from a night out at about 2.30 in the morning. It had been a good night and although we were not drunk, we were pretty giggly. However, the living-room sobered us up rather quickly. Every one of the pictures that had been hanging on the walls were now on the floor. But they hadn’t fallen. At least, if they had fallen, they had managed to land in a neat pile in the middle of the carpet. We couldn’t think of anything else to do, so we rehung them and went to sleep.

Uneasily.





The Inductor


induct-ance: (-ans) n. The property of an electric circuit by which a varying current in it produces a magnetic field that induces voltages in the same or nearby circuit.

induct-ee: n. A person inducted.

OXFORD ENGLISH DICTIONARY

Typical of these incidents was a college lecturer’s claim to feel a hand pressed over her mouth as she walked through the Covenanters’ Prison. She fainted and when she came round she noticed a strange mark on her cheek and neck. She remains convinced the bruises were not the result of the fall.

‘Edinburgh’s Ghoulden Years’,

EDINBURGH EVENING NEWS, 20 OCTOBER 2000



Ben Scott was about to give his usual warning. For over an hour he had herded his walking tour party – numbering around 25 – through the high-sided wynds of the Royal Mile then over the silent headstone-studded hillocks of Greyfriars graveyard. After three months of taking City of the Dead tours he had achieved the balance he wanted between facts and entertainment and each dark historical tale was now laced with equally black humour.

The wynds at night were sinister and claustrophobic but it wasn’t until they entered the silent graveyard that the tour party’s laughs became tinged with nervousness. The moon was full and it radiated a sickly light that turned the shadows moating each ancient tomb into midnight pools. In the centre of the graveyard, the crouching, compact hulk of Greyfriars church cast the deepest, blackest shadow of all. The visitors looked around anxiously and shuffled nearer to the lucky couple who had been given flashlights. A chill breeze had sprung up and autumn leaves spiralled out of the starless night, brushing the faces of unsuspecting listeners and eliciting terrified squeaks or manly shudders.

Now the party stood outside the gates of the Covenanters’ Prison. To the left loomed the ribbed dome of Bluidy Mackenzie’s tomb, and to the right was the slightly less impressive Georgian mausoleum housing the mortal remains of the architect James Adams. Across the gate itself a thick chain gleamed in the moonlight, fastened by an impressively large padlock.

Ben dangled the key from his gloved hand.

‘Ready?’

The visitors didn’t look ready at all. Ben unlocked the chain with a flourish and the gate creaked slowly open.

‘Ladies and gentlemen, welcome to Jurassic Park.’

The visitors laughed uncertainly, wondering whether there really was a monster lurking beyond that barrier. At this moment they were painfully reminded that this was not a movie they could turn off if things went wrong.

‘Oh. Before we go in. I forgot something.’ The visitors heaved a sigh of relief.

Ben launched into his warning. It was a standard disclaimer and all the tour guides gave a variation of it. He described the ways in which the poltergeist operated and emphasised that if anyone who was asthmatic, pregnant, claustrophobic or had a weak heart insisted on going in, they only had themselves to blame.

Then he threw in the killer line.

‘Is anyone here an inductor?’

The visitors looked at each other in puzzlement. Was anyone here an inductor? Nobody had a clue. Nobody knew what an inductor was.

Ben raised a dramatic eyebrow, though nobody could actually see it in the darkness. An inductor, he told the audience theatrically, was a type of person who attracted a poltergeist. In fact, sometimes they even created one. Strictly speaking, this wasn’t true. People who attract or create a poltergeist are called the ‘focus’, as Ben well knew, but inductor sounded better. Given the dubious origins of the word, it was a safe bet that nobody was going to admit to being one, and this instance was no exception.

Ben led his silent group through the gates. They edged warily down the shadowy canyon of the Covenanters’ Prison like a miniature seventh cavalry, gargoyle-laden tombs rising on either side in an uncomfortable reminder that death was, literally, all around. Ben stopped outside the Black Mausoleum and swung back its iron gate. This one was well oiled, so he had to make the creaking noise out of the corner of his mouth. He shone his flashlight into the black gaping maw.

‘In you get, folks,’ he enthused. ‘Me? Oh no. I never go first. Carry on. Right to the back.’

The crowd shuffled reluctantly inside.

‘It’s really dark back here,’ a voice drifted out from the tomb’s interior. The crowd paused in a little bottleneck of fear.

‘I know,’ said Ben sympathetically. ‘But the poltergeist likes to attack at the front of the tomb.’

The crowd surged forward again.

‘There. Knew you’d all fit.’

Safely last, Ben strolled into the vault. There came a polite cough from outside and he turned in surprise. A tall, burly figure stood silhouetted in the vault doorway. The moonlight spread a silver sheen over his glasses, obscuring his expression.

‘C’mon, get in here,’ Ben beckoned.

‘S’cuse me, sir,’ said the straggler, politely but firmly. ‘I reckon I’m one of those inductors.’

The accent was unmistakable, from somewhere in the deep south of the United States. Ben, who had lived for several years in America, recognised it as Texan. He sighed. ‘Now, what would make you think that?’ he inquired, equally politely.

‘’Cause I been in a place where there was a poltergeist before.’

‘Ah.’

‘An’ it attacked me.’

‘Oh.’

There was a hush from the crowd at the back of the tomb. Ben could almost hear knuckles whitening.

‘In that case, don’t get in here. In fact, get right over there.’ He pointed to the graveyard wall opposite. It was about 30 feet away, as far from the Black Mausoleum as the American could go without being out of sight entirely. The Texan was happy to oblige. He trotted over to the wall and leant against it facing the tomb. Ben turned back to his group, searching for a way to turn the situation to his advantage.

‘Can you all see him?’ he whispered.

The tour party nodded.

‘If he really is an inductor, something’s going to happen to him. This thing normally takes a while to get going – you know, before it does anything. I usually finish the tour and get out of here before something goes wrong.’ He paused to let the implications of the word ‘usually’ sink in.

‘If this gentleman really is an inductor,’ Ben continued, ‘if he is, I bet something happens to him straight away. Keep your eyes peeled.’

Some of the more astute visitors unshouldered their cameras. The Texan obligingly lit a cigarette and its tiny red pinpoint cast a demonic glow onto his spectacles. Ben waited. Nothing happened. He hadn’t really expected anything but it was worth a try. He turned back to his group. ‘All right, ladies and gentleman,’ he began. ‘Here we are in the Bla . . .’

There was a soft thud to his left, followed by a horrified gasp. One of the tour party lay on the ground. Ben crouched beside the motionless man, signalling the rest of the crowd to stay where they were. The fallen figure was a male in his mid-twenties. Ben recognised him as one of a small group of Norwegians who had joined the tour.

‘Sorry,’ said the fallen Norwegian in a muffled voice. He lifted himself off the damp soil with a swift push-up and staggered to his feet, shaking his head in surprise. ‘It’s all right. All right,’ he said sheepishly. ‘I lose my balance. This is all.’

The group burst into thankful laughter, some of it verging on maniacal. Ben heaved a hammy sigh of relief. ‘As I was saying,’ he grinned, ‘Ladies and gentlemen, here we are in the Bla . . .’

The Norwegian went down again.

‘Stay right where you are,’ Ben cautioned, crouching down again. ‘Everything will be fine.’

This time the Norwegian lay motionless. He seemed to be out cold.

‘It’s all right. Happens all the time!’ But the tension in Ben’s voice was obvious. ‘He’ll be fine. A couple of minutes and he’ll be wide awake and right as rain. Honestly. I’ve seen it all before . . . What the . . .?’

The tour party looked up, eyes wide.

The lone Texan was loping enthusiastically across the grass towards them. Flinging his cigarette into the darkness, he burst into the vault and grabbed the unconscious Norwegian under each arm. ‘I got ya, buddy!’ he grimaced, and began to drag the unresisting man out of the tomb.

‘Oh, for God’s sake!’ Ben groaned, struggling to his feet. ‘Here. You and you, help get him outside. Careful now. Not everybody!’

Two able-bodied youths, the Norwegian’s friends, moved forward and helped lift their motionless companion. Along with the Texan, they began an awkward six-legged shuffle, disappearing through the tomb door like a giant crab. Ben turned back to the crowd to size up the situation. Tour parties could range from rabidly sceptical to unquestioningly accepting and their attitude greatly affected their behaviour. From experience Ben knew that most men in the group, even if they were genuinely scared, wouldn’t show it. The same was true of parents and older women. But the bulk of this tour party was young, female and clearly scared. Up to this point they hadn’t really cared whether the stories were true or not, they were happy enough to get carried away by the atmosphere of the tour. But now there was an unconscious Norwegian being carried away instead and the thrill of a ghostly adventure had been replaced by an alarm that bordered on panic. Many were considering the possibility that there really was a malevolent entity in the darkened tomb alongside them.

Ben had done enough sizing up. ‘Right,’ he said confidently. ‘I think it’s time we left.’ The crowd’s relief was palpable. ‘I want everyone to make their way towards the doorway. Not all at once! Take your time, stay together, move slowly. There’s plenty of time.’

The crowd began to shuffle forward, Ben directing them towards the sanctuary of the open air with the efficiency of a traffic cop, an image enhanced by the amount of black leather he was sporting.

He never did find out who screamed. It came from the back of the party, in the darkest, farthest corner of the Black Mausoleum – a horrified female voice ringing out. ‘It’s got my head!’ the woman shrieked. ‘It’s in my hair!’ Nobody could see what had ‘got’ the young lady in question. It might have been a prank – one of her friends grabbing her in the blackness. She may have got her hair caught in a crack in the wall as she moved away from it. Maybe something supernatural really did slap her on the head. Whatever caused it, the terror in the woman’s voice was all too genuine. The crowd surged forward.

It’s a rule of nature that, in the event of danger, flashlights either stop working or turn out to be in the possession of those too petrified to use them. Ben’s £30 Maglite was swept from his hand as he tried to hold back 25 shambling bodies and broke as soon as it hit the ground. The other two flashlight holders in the group had been placed on either side of the crowd, at the front of the vault, to shed maximum light. They immediately shot out of the door, leaving everyone else in pitch blackness.

The crowd burst into a terrified run. Ben wisely pressed himself against the tomb wall and let them stream past.

Fear has a wonderful way of disorienting people. Pouring through the vault doorway, the panicked crowd had no idea in which direction to head. The moon had vanished behind a cloud and now it was as dark outside as it had been in the Black Mausoleum. The two flashlight bearers, remembering the Jurassic Park joke, had switched their torches off rather than attract the poltergeist’s attention by waving a beam of light around. With an instinct for survival that must have originated with cavemen fleeing sabre-tooth tigers, half the crowd intuitively sprinted to the left and half to the right. Those who had gone left soon realised their error, coming to a dead-end after 20 yards. Unwilling to become stationary targets, they trundled around in the darkness yelling for help and looking for the non-existent exit. Those who had gone the right way soon found themselves, to their immense relief, heading for the gates of the Covenanters’ Prison, but failed to notice the overhanging branches lurking between them and salvation. Three or four scurried right through them, only to encounter what felt like long, thin fingers brushing over their faces. There was a renewed bout of screaming. One woman turned and ran back the way she had come, shouting that the poltergeist was trying to eat her eyes.

The two Norwegians let go of their rigid companion and stared in disbelief as this human pandemonium emerged from the darkness and surged around them. The Texan gamely carried on, but the sudden jolt of his feet being dropped had brought the comatose Norwegian to his senses. The last thing he remembered was standing in the Black Mausoleum. Now he was being dragged backwards through the graveyard by something he couldn’t see. He let loose with a stream of hysterical Norwegian invectives in which the word ‘poltergeist’ was clearly audible several times and the Texan finally dropped him.

It took almost 15 minutes to get everyone out. One girl was found hiding on the floor of another tomb with her arms over her head. Several people sported impressive cuts and bruises but couldn’t tell if they’d been caused by something supernatural or by running into headstones in the dark.

Ben stood by the gates of the Covenanters’ Prison trying to get his heart to stop thumping. He had taken his shaken group to the graveyard entrance and bade them farewell. The Norwegian, it seemed, was none the worse for his ordeal. In fact he couldn’t remember much of what had happened which, Ben concluded, was probably a good thing. The Texan had introduced himself as Leon Hill, shaken Ben’s hand warmly and insisted that he hadn’t had such a fine time in years. It turned out he came from Louisiana. Despite their mixed feelings, the rest of the tour party had agreed that it wasn’t an outing they were ever likely to forget.

The Norwegians beckoned Ben over. ‘We do not wish to be impolite,’ one of them said in hushed tones. ‘We know you will probably tell others about this . . . incident.’

‘That’s a fair bet,’ Ben admitted.

‘We . . . eh . . . we in Norway are not the type to be scared by poltergeists. To . . . believe in poltergeists. We certainly do not fall down for no reason.’

‘And?’

‘We were thinking it would be better if you told people we were Swedish.’

The rest of the tour party was drifting shakily out into the street. Ben turned and indicated in the direction they had just come from. ‘I forgot to lock the bloody gate. Anybody want to come and help?’

The tour party looked as if he’d suggested they eat their own livers.

‘Didn’t think so.’

Ben turned and trudged back into the darkness.

‘I’ll come with you,’ an American teenager in engineer pants and a baseball cap peeled off from the group. ‘I wanna take one last look at that place.’

Nodding, two of his friends joined him.

Ben glanced back. ‘You coming, Leon?’

‘I don’t think I will,’ grinned the Louisianan. ‘Thanks for asking, though.’

Ben and the Americans walked back to the Covenanters’ gate and locked it without further incident. They stood gazing through the bars at the peaceful shadowy strip of cemetery. The Americans lit cigarettes.‘So . . . does this kind of thing happen every night?’ asked one of the young men.

‘If it did I would have quit a long time ago.’

His friend looked thoughtful. ‘Do you think it’s real?’ he asked Ben.

Ben turned away from the gates and shook his head. ‘I don’t know,’ he said.

The Americans nodded. ‘Cool.’

With that they turned and headed back towards the real world.





Alan


Alan Vickers is from North Wales. On 5 August 2000 he witnessed the collapse of Deirdre Quirk from Ireland in the Black Mausoleum.

Last year I had the pleasure of experiencing what happens to people in Greyfriars graveyard. Now, I will admit to being slightly sceptical. I live in Edinburgh now, and people from Edinburgh think it’s funny that it has such a reputation as a haunted city. I had heard about the Covenanters’ Prison and all the things that are supposed to go on there. That’s the reason I went on the tour in the first place. I’d never really wanted to go on anything like this before but it sounded like it might be a bit of a laugh.

So, armed with all of this prior knowledge, a friend and myself went along one evening to see exactly what all the fuss was about. I enjoyed the tour, it was funny and informative, but I can’t say that I was particularly scared. Then came the part we’d all been warned about, and that I’d been looking forward to. Entering the Covenanters’ Prison at the back of Greyfriars cemetery is a very unusual experience. Here you are in the middle of this great city, surrounded by hustle and bustle, yet you have no sense of it once you get inside. There is hardly any noise; the whole area feels still. It was deep into twilight by the time our tour arrived there and were herded along towards the Black Mausoleum.

The tour party was probably about 30 people strong. Some were tourists, some had read articles about the Mackenzie Poltergeist and others were just out to be entertained. Throughout the tour we had been told about the mausoleum and, before entering, people with heart conditions and those of a nervous disposition were asked to wait outside. Whether it was this that caused it, or the surroundings, there was a real sense of unease amongst the group when we were packed into the mausoleum itself. It was cramped, damp, and as dark as I have ever experienced – you could barely see past the outline of the person two feet ahead of you. It was very unsettling and an incredible experience, feeling the unease growing, trapped in this dark place. The group was silent, each member deep in their own little thoughts. All the same, I just could not believe that this feeling was being created by anything but our own paranoia and vivid imaginations.

From the doorway, looking in, I was at the right-hand wall, near the back. Nearer the front, over at the left-hand wall, there was suddenly a heavy thump followed by screaming. A girl was lying on the ground. The quiet atmosphere broke. Panic spread like a wave and people started moving, then muttering, and then people began to shout: ‘Let me out,’ ‘I want to leave,’ ‘Get out,’ as the group fought its way out into the relative safety of the twilight. Once she had been carried out, however, the girl quickly regained consciousness.

As I said, I’m a sceptic and not frightened by stories or dark places, but at the same time, I cannot quite explain or describe the feeling I had in that tomb. Maybe it was just my subconscious picking up on the group’s collective unease. All the same, I’m now a much easier man to convince of the possibility of poltergeists. As for my friend, I think she is easier to convince too. Although it was dark and I was uneasy, I was well aware of everything that was going on. I know for a fact that at no time did my friend fall, bump into anything or get pushed by anyone.

Yet the morning after the tour, she had bruises on her body and scratches down her back.





The Exorcist


But as the ceremony drew to a close a shadow glided across the Greyfriars Kirk’s window – although the doors were locked and no one was inside.

‘So what is that figure lurking in a window?’

EDINBURGH EVENING NEWS, 15 NOVEMBER 1999

At the time, Mr Grant said, ‘I hoped I had exorcised all the spirits but it appears one had been hiding.’

‘Exorcist minister dies trying to contact dead’

THE EXPRESS, 29 JANUARY 2000



On 25 September 1999, a male visitor on a City of the Dead tour spotted something white flitting between the tombs in Greyfriars. It appeared to be following the tour party. Kate Kavanagh, who was taking the tour, did not see anything and suggested it might be a fox or even a child playing a prank, but the gentleman found the sight distressing enough to leave the group and graveyard immediately. After that the tour resembled a wagon train. Those at the back looked nervously behind and the whole party seemed ready to form a defensive circle at a moment’s notice.

Two days later, Ben Scott was in full storytelling flow when an Australian male in his mid-twenties plunged to the floor of the Black Mausoleum. The unconscious antipodean woke up five minutes later, profoundly embarrassed and declining to give his name, though he did insist that he had never fainted before in his life. Young Australian males, apparently, didn’t do that kind of thing.

On 10 October several of Kate’s party again saw ‘something white’ moving between the graves. Again, this unidentified stalker seemed to unduly frighten those members who spotted it, and three of them left the graveyard. Kate stared after them in consternation. ‘Am I missing something here?’ she demanded of the agitated group.

On 13 October an English visitor was overcome with nausea in the Black Mausoleum. Swaying slightly, she reached out to the woman next to her for support. As her hand touched the stranger’s shoulder the second woman looked at Ben Scott with sudden panic. ‘My legs are frozen,’ she said in an astonished voice, then proved herself partially wrong by taking several steps forward before collapsing in the doorway.

The Mackenzie Poltergeist had come to the attention of the press by this time and local newspapers invited a well-known spiritualist minister, the Reverend Colin Grant, to come and give his opinion of the graveyard disturbances. Ben Scott was also invited.

A small, strange-looking group gathered in the graveyard on a chilly afternoon in November – Ben Scott, Colin Grant and his wife, a reporter named Claire Gardner and a press photographer. Colin Grant, a stout, friendly man with a down-to-earth manner, shook Ben’s hand and asked where the trouble seemed to be. Ben hadn’t really thought of the poltergeist as trouble before, but it occurred to him that Colin Grant saw this as a rescue mission rather than a publicity stunt. ‘Come with me,’ Ben said.

The photographer had wandered off to take shots of the most impressive tombs and Mrs Grant had wisely opted to stay in the car, so only Claire and Colin accompanied their guide to the Covenanters’ Prison.

Colin Grant didn’t talk much. Instead, he looked around as he walked in a manner that implied he was taking in more than just the sights. The sky was grey and overcast and a strong biting wind tore through the leafless branches above his head. Claire Gardner chatted animatedly to Ben and Colin as they neared the gates of the Covenanters’ Prison, remarking several times how creepy the graveyard seemed and how it gave her the shivers. As far as Ben could see, temperatures like this would give a penguin the shivers, but he assumed it was a journalistic trick to put them all in the right frame of mind. Ben never saw the graveyard as creepy during daylight hours – the worst it could manage was an austere, lonely beauty. On this gusting, granite day Greyfriars merely seemed hostile, coldly poking at the little group with sharp windy fingers.

Ben reached the Covenanters’ Prison ahead of the others, unfastened the padlock and threw open the gate. The wind howled up the line of tombs and shuffled a herd of dying leaves across the scrubby grass. A sudden blast swept grit into Ben’s face. He stepped back, rubbing at his eyes, to let Colin Grant go through. Colin had stopped uneasily in the gateway. ‘We don’t have to go in if you don’t want to,’ said Claire Gardner sympathetically, though Ben failed to see how she’d have a story unless they did. Colin simply nodded, took a deep breath, and walked through the gates.

As soon as he entered he staggered sideways, almost overbalancing, and clung shakily to one of the tomb walls. It looked as if a particularly strong surge of wind had hit the minister. Claire and Ben looked at each other in genuine surprise. Colin Grant was muttering to himself and seemed disoriented and in pain. Clutching at his head he straightened up, let go of the wall, and slowly and carefully backed out of the Covenanters’ Prison.

Ben locked the gate while Claire helped Colin to a nearby grass verge. The minister sat down heavily, his face pallid and grey and his breathing laboured. He looked up as Ben approached. ‘There are many spirits in pain through there,’ he said matter-of-factly. ‘Many.’ Then he looked directly at Ben and beckoned him closer. ‘There is something else as well. Something much stronger.’

At the urging of the same newspaper, Colin Grant went back to Greyfriars on 14 November 1999. Convinced that hundreds of spirits had become somehow trapped in the Covenanters’ Prison, he agreed to exorcise the area. Again he was accompanied by Claire Gardner and her photographer. This time, Ben didn’t bother to go.

Armed with a bible and 14 candles, Grant entered the prison and made his way to the centre of the area. He laid out 12 candles in a circle with another two behind and placed two small crosses in the ground for protection. The wind was blowing hard once again. He had trouble lighting the candles, but the witnesses swore that once they were lit the flames stood erect, as if the wind no longer had the power to affect them. Colin Grant let the bible fall open and began to recite.

There was no wailing or roaring or gnashing of teeth. Nobody vomited green slime. The journalist’s and photographer’s heads did not spin round. After ten minutes the Reverend Colin Grant walked out of the Covenanters’ Prison and told those watching that the trapped spirits had been freed. He looked exhausted and physically ill and as he once again lowered himself onto the grass verge, he made a macabre remark: ‘This has taken a lot out of me,’ he said, matter-of-factly. ‘It’ll most probably kill me.’

The reporters assumed he was joking.

Neither Claire Gardner nor Ben Scott realised how deeply troubled Colin Grant was by what he had encountered – he confided to his son, Colin junior, that Greyfriars was like ‘nothing else I’ve experienced’. According to the Reverend Grant, he had ‘freed’ at least 200 spirits from an indescribable sense of woe, but he also repeated that there were ‘bigger and stranger’ forces in the Covenanters’ Prison that had not yet been removed. Colin Grant fully intended to go back and face whatever had unnerved him so much in that patch of graveyard. But first he needed to recover from the struggle he had just endured, one he felt had mentally and physically exhausted him.

He never did.

The Reverend Colin Grant collapsed and died on 21 January 2000.

If Colin Grant was right about freeing hundreds of trapped spirits from the Covenanters’ Prison, he was also right, it seemed, about leaving something behind. The night after the exorcism Lorena Ramirez from Mexico began to choke as soon as she entered the Black Mausoleum. Gasping that something was ‘pressing on her throat’, she dashed from the vault. As she ran she scattered Colin Grant’s candles, still set in a circle on the grass outside.

The next month, a college lecturer named Sharon Brewster was standing in the Black Mausoleum when she felt a sensation ‘like hands holding her throat’. She tried to get out of the vault but collapsed in the doorway. When she woke up next day she had a friend take photographs of her face. All down one side, and around her neck, were vivid yellow bruises, as if she had been physically assaulted – as if something powerful had held her by the throat and hit her.

The Mackenzie Poltergeist seemed to have become stronger than ever.





Kate


Statement by Kate Kavanagh, tour guide and director of City of the Dead.

Ben Scott and myself established the City of the Dead tour in 1998 and I have worked as a guide on the tours from the very beginning. Although I enjoy my job, from time to time I sense something in the Covenanters’ Prison I cannot explain.

On occasion, when I take the tour party through the gates and into the prison, a feeling of fear overcomes me. It is as though something alive is with us in the darkness, lurking in the shadowy tombs. I cannot say if this is my imagination or if it is the fear and uneasiness of the tour party that I am picking up on, or if something really is in there, waiting, and making its presence known. During the past two years I have had many people on my tours requesting, or rather demanding, to leave the mausoleum, as they too seem to have felt this strange presence. Some are even more sensitive and will refuse to enter the mausoleum, preferring to listen to the tour from the safety of the doorway.

The night of 16 September 2000 is a good example of the type of thing that happens. The tour had been going well and all its members had been enjoying tales of Old Edinburgh. They had cringed in horror when I told them about the atrocities committed at the North Berwick witch trials, sniggered at the true story of Greyfriars Bobby and shuddered at the tales about Edinburgh’s infamous bodysnatchers. As I said, all seemed well. Then it was time to go to the back of the graveyard and enter the Covenanters’ Prison.

We gathered in the darkness at the padlocked gates and I began to tell them a little about poltergeists, and about this poltergeist in particular. It was at this point that the group realised the tour was getting a lot more sinister and a few visitors were beginning to feel uneasy. I turned to unlock the padlock and unchain the old metal gates, when I too felt a sense of something I had not been aware of in other parts of the graveyard. It hit me very quickly and I didn’t understand what I was feeling. I took a deep breath. I didn’t want the tour party to know that I was suddenly genuinely scared; for the guide to be as terrified as the customer isn’t very professional.

I unlocked the padlock, removed the chain and slowly pushed the gate open. I stepped inside and swiftly encouraged the rest of the tour party to follow me. I suddenly felt I wanted to stay close to them and didn’t stride ahead as usual. ‘Stay close. There’s safety in numbers,’ I assured them. But I was really reassuring myself. As we walked down the Covenanters’ Prison, towards the Black Mausoleum, I could hear myself breathing faster and my heart was far too fast. Something was not right. I couldn’t say what, and I still can’t, but I had never felt like this before. We entered the Black Mausoleum, the tour party slowly shuffling forward in a protective huddle. I paused. I was not going to let my imagination get the better of me. Nothing had ever happened to me before, why would it now?

I started speaking with new confidence. I had decided that everything would be fine. It was getting near to the end of the tour. Nothing had happened. I laughed inside at how stupid I had been. I didn’t feel afraid any more. If there really had been something in the prison, it had moved somewhere else.

Suddenly I heard a scream, followed by a thud. I turned on my torch and, as the tomb lit up, the rest of the tour party also screamed and surged backwards, flattening themselves against the wall. A girl lay face down on the floor.

Panic struck. The girl’s boyfriend began trying to lift and revive her and I ran over and checked that she was breathing. Having received emergency medical training I was reluctant to move her but, all of a sudden, I had the same feeling as I had earlier. As if something malevolent had materialised right beside me and beside the fallen girl. Suddenly I felt real terror, as if it was about to attack us in the darkness. The two nearest members of the tour party grabbed the unconscious girl, as if they felt the same thing – and the four of us carried her outside.

The rest of the tour party quickly followed. As we waited for the girl to begin to recover properly the group became even more eager to leave the prison. They had felt what I felt and certainly didn’t want to hang around to see if the Mackenzie Poltergeist was going to give a repeat performance.

I knelt down. ‘What’s your name?’ I asked the girl.

‘Lucy McDade,’ she replied.

‘Can you stand up?’ I asked.

She nodded. Her boyfriend helped her up and we all began our walk back to the gates of the Covenanters’ Prison. They seemed very far away. After only a few steps Lucy’s legs gave way, her head lolled and she fell back to the ground. ‘I’ll stay with her,’ her boyfriend bravely volunteered. ‘You take the rest.’ Decisive bloke. Everybody was happy about the idea, including me. We walked quickly to the cemetery gates and I said goodbye, then ran back to the Covenanters’ Prison, keeping away from any gravestones that might have something hiding behind them. Lucy had recovered enough to make it out of the prison and I shut and chained the gate.

Afterwards, Lucy swore that she had felt an overwhelming presence closing in around her in the Black Mausoleum. She felt cold and nauseous, and suddenly found it hard to breathe, as if something had cut off her air. The next thing she remembered was opening her eyes to find herself lying on the grass outside the Black Mausoleum. She said she had never fainted before and had never experienced anything like the events that had happened to her on the tour. Though Lucy seemed to relax slightly as we left the cemetery, she turned to her boyfriend and said, ‘I will never go in there again.’

I can’t say I blame her. I’d been in there a million times – it’s a scary place, but this night was different. I think I really felt, for the first time, what the victims of the poltergeist’s attacks feel. I always hoped that if it was real, I wasn’t its type. I like to think it just made a mistake.





Psychic Tendencies


Spiteful ghosts appear to have returned to Edinburgh’s most haunted graveyard, despite the efforts of a spiritualist minister to exorcise them. One of the most recent victims fainted after feeling she was being suffocated and woke up with bruising round her neck.

And just days later, a Californian tourist collapsed after visiting the Covenanters’ Prison in Greyfriars Churchyard.

‘Back . . . with a vengeance’,

EDINBURGH EVENING NEWS, 6 JANUARY 2000

It is Sunday morning and Ms Sneddon is standing in the last tomb in the Covenanters’ Prison in Greyfriars Kirkyard, Edinburgh. She has sensed some change in the atmosphere and the dousing crystal she carries everywhere is spinning wildly in an anti-clockwise direction.

Ms Sneddon says, ‘There are lots of spirits here and they are not happy . There is a terrible stench of decaying bodies.’

Beside her, the leader of the ghost-hunting expedition, Brian Allen, measures the level of electromagnetic activity. The needle on his meter jerks forward, indicating the presence of something out of the ordinary, but Mr Allen cannot say what it is.

‘No rest for wicked in graveyard’,

THE SCOTSMAN, 6 MARCH 2000



The two mediums stood in the centre of the Covenanters’ Prison, each with an arm stretched in front of their body, looking like reluctant superheroes unsure of how to take off. Behind them, Brian Allen and Bill Devlin, heads of the Scottish branch of ‘Strange Phenomena Investigators’, were sweeping the area with a ‘TriField Meter’, a machine that looked like a cross between a Geiger counter and a guitar pedal. Near the gates of the Covenanters’ Prison an American director and producer, there to film a documentary about the poltergeist, were making notes and talking on their mobile phones. Both were thin and blond and muffled against the March wind, and Ben Scott couldn’t tell which was which. He sat on the grass, his back against the Covenanters wall and his feet on a low grave border, dressed in what had now become his trademark black. He was bored.

This was not the first excursion into the Covenanters’ Prison for Brian Allen and Billy Devlin. They had already scoured the prison as part of an investigation covered by the Scotsman newspaper and BBC Radio Scotland and had claimed, in their written report, to have found evidence of paranormal activity:

Anne-Marie mentioned that there were spirits moving around us, displeased that we were there. As she said this, the indicator needle abruptly shot fully upscale and dropped immediately back to its former reading. While this may have been a coincidence, I do not believe so – the meter had somehow registered a transient reading, a ‘spike’ in the local magnetic field.



The SPI and the two mediums had walked the length of the Covenanters’ Prison trying to detect supernatural presences. They obviously found the place satisfactorily haunted. According to their report, they spotted a young boy, felt the pain of hundreds of Covenanters and could smell ‘death and corruption’. As far as Ben could see, smelling death in a graveyard was like smelling pies in a butcher’s shop, but he let it go.

He turned to the two Americans and nodded his head in the direction of the little psychic party investigating their way into the distance. ‘So. What’s the verdict?’

The producer consulted her notes. ‘The mediums say that some sort of bizarre ceremonies have been held here in the past. Possibly witchcraft, but more likely Black Mass and Satanic rituals. They say Edinburgh still has a bunch of practising Wiccan covens.’

‘Aye. There are a few around.’

‘And that Wiccans can sometimes tip over the edge and turn to devil worship. Ooh. It makes me shiver.’

Ben blew into his hands, white from the nippy spring wind. ‘Wicca is a religion based on pre-Christian teachings,’ he said. ‘Satan is a Christian concept. Wiccans are about as likely to turn to worshipping the devil as they are to worshipping Allah. Besides, what would Satanists be doing in a churchyard?’

‘They said this was in the 1800s.’

‘You mean when the Old Town was at its most crowded, this place was ringed by tenements full of people and bodysnatchers were getting chased by night watchmen all over the graveyard? Sure. That makes sense.’

The two Americans looked at each other. ‘It’s only a show.’

‘Fine,’ said Ben. ‘It’s just that if there’s really something in there, I want it to get fair representation.’ And I’m talking like a nutter, he thought to himself.

‘Let’s go see how they’re getting on.’ The director pulled her scarf tighter round her throat and marched off down the Covenanters’ Prison. The producer helped Ben to his feet. ‘Have you ever been attacked?’ she asked. ‘Ever been hurt?’

‘Many times. But never by a poltergeist.’

They walked side by side behind the director.

‘You like this thing, don’t you?’ the producer asked.

‘It’s invisible. It knocks people down. What’s not to like?’

They reached the end of the Covenanters’ Prison, where the mediums were revolving slowly, hands outstretched, like large children in some solemn, secret game. Bill motioned the party over and pointed to the TriField meter. ‘Look,’ he said, pointing excitedly at the flickering needle. ‘I’m getting a reading.’

‘What does that mean?’

‘This measures electromagnetic energy. We think that a lot of paranormal energy may be electromagnetic in origin.’ He pointed the meter at the graveyard wall and the needle jumped again.

The Americans consulted their notes. ‘What’s on the other side of the wall?’

Ben shrugged. ‘An electricity generator?’

The investigators scowled at him.

‘Joking. Sorry. Actually, I’ve no idea.’

Bill Devlin scowled too. ‘It’s funny that we would get a reading way over here, but twice we’ve had nothing in this Black Mausoleum where all these poltergeist attacks are supposed to have occurred.’ Brian pointed the meter at the empty tomb to his right. The needle stayed perfectly still.

The Americans looked at Ben expectantly. Ben blew into his hands again. ‘Doesn’t surprise me.’

‘Why not?’

‘That’s not the Black Mausoleum.’ He pointed. ‘It’s that one up there.’

The mediums looked sheepish. The Americans glanced at each other and smiled.

The SPI and their psychics did one more investigation, on 6 April 2000, this time accompanied by a BBC film crew. And this time they entered the correct Black Mausoleum. Their second report was very different:

. . . the rest of the party, eight in number, filed in and stood in silence. The mediums were clearly uneasy. I quickly became aware of feelings of nausea sweeping over me and I felt dizzy, almost as if I was outside my body. Bill glanced at me and leaned against a wall, a grim expression on his face. He told me that he felt very dizzy and squeamish. I left the group in the tomb and went outside into the bright sunshine. The nausea continued. A few moments later the rest of the group joined me. The mediums looked pale and particularly ill at ease; I did not have to be told that there was something ‘not quite right’ about the tomb.



As a matter of fact, Ben Scott had read up on the theory that electromagnetic energy was behind poltergeist activity. The idea was advanced by the psychic investigator, Albert Budden, who suggested that paranormal phenomena might be the bizarre side-effects of electromagnetic pollution. According to Budden, our landscape is permanently laced with electromagnetic energy, but there are places where this unseen pollution is very dense. These ‘hot spots’ create powerful standing waves that can actually affect physical laws as well as mental health. Budden claimed that people living in ‘hot spots’ develop unexpected allergies, nausea, panic attacks, mood swings and, in extreme cases, lapses of consciousness. Though an idea like this would once have been scoffed at, the scientific community now agrees that living under power lines or near powerful transmitters can adversely affect human health. One only has to consider the recent mobile phone/cancer links to see how an apparently harmless piece of technology can be misjudged.

Budden also believed that experiments in electromagnetics by the Canadian scientist, John Hutchison, could explain the physical effects of ‘poltergeist activity’. Hutchison crammed a variety of devices such as Tesla coils, Van de Graaff generators and radio frequency transmitters, all of which emit electromagnetic energy, into a single room. He found that after the equipment had been running for a while, effects identical to those commonly regarded as poltergeist phenomena began to occur. Although the electromagnetic energy was low powered, objects hovered in the air or moved about; fires started in the building where Hutchison was working; metal distorted and broke; water spontaneously swirled in containers and lights appeared in the air, then vanished. These phenomena occurred in the same unpredictable way as in reported poltergeist cases. Nothing would happen for days, then coins would flip or water would swirl. The downside of these experiments, of course, was that the electrical apparatus Hutchison was using would then short circuit or malfunction – including, ironically, any monitoring equipment.

Ben Scott and Kate Kavanagh sat in Ben’s house drinking wine. It was 11.30 at night; Kate had finished taking a graveyard tour and had stopped in to see him on her way home. Once they had been more than just business partners, and they still had the easy ambience of two people who have known each other well and managed to remain friends.

Ben was being boring. ‘Electromagnetic forces, my bum,’ he said, pouring himself a large glass. ‘It’s a graveyard, not a bloody telephone exchange. Of course the needle on that machine flickers. It flickers every time a bloody car goes past.’

Kate came out of the kitchen with another bottle. ‘What you getting so het up about? At least they didn’t say there was nothing there.’

‘I don’t want every Joe telepathy and his auntie running through the graveyard spotting the ghost of Little Lord Fauntleroy – we look like idiots for even being on the same planet.’

Kate sat cross-legged on the bed and lit a cigarette. Ben’s bed was in his living-room. So was everything else, for that matter. His computer, his books, his guitar, his easel, his CD collection. Ben didn’t like to go to too much trouble to get what he wanted. We’ll be fine, love.’ Kate blew out a stream of smoke. ‘All we have to do is tell the truth. We take people into the Black Mausoleum, things happen to them. We don’t know why. We can prove they happen – we don’t have to explain it.’

‘I like explanations.’

‘No you don’t. You like mystery. You just think that everything has to have an explanation.’

‘In that case, yes, the graveyard does have an electromagnetic field.’

‘Where?’

‘Edinburgh University Artificial Intelligence Unit. Where they try to make machines that think. It backs right against the graveyard wall, ends at the back of the Black Mausoleum, in fact. That place has got to be full of electromagnetic stuff.’

‘I suppose so,’ Kate agreed.

‘And if the Mackenzie Poltergeist isn’t an artificial intelligence, I don’t know what is.’

‘What was that you were saying about not looking like an idiot?’

Ben poured more wine and lit a cigarette. ‘I don’t know,’ he sighed. ‘And I don’t care anyway. We should talk about something other than business for a change.’

‘I like your theory about poltergeists being caused by emotional stress. Hey. Maybe we cause it.’

‘The two of us? Why? You got any emotional stress?’

‘Well, I did.’

It was true. Kate had been in a motorcycle crash in 1995, when another bike had catapulted into her own and almost killed her. She had undergone a long, painful, determined struggle to regain her fiery spirit but, now and again, her old fears rose to the surface. She could lead people through a haunted graveyard at night, but Ben knew Kate was still afraid to cross a road unless the nearest vehicle was a huge distance away.

‘Well, I’m fine,’ Ben said emphatically. ‘Being locked in a cupboard as a child and beaten with a cow’s tongue in a sock hasn’t done me any harm at all.’

He began to twitch one eye convulsively. Kate laughed and poured another glass of wine.

‘Yeah, yeah – you don’t give a damn about anything and nothing bothers you. Talk about repressed emotions! You’ve got more emotional baggage than anyone I know.’

‘I don’t know what you’re talking about. I’ve got an emotional backpack at the very most.’

‘Ben. You drink like a fish but you never get drunk. You drive yourself like a slave instead of getting others to help you. You always have a different girl on your arm . . .’

‘I have a lot of love to give.’

‘. . . so you never have to be alone.’

‘Let’s talk about business again.’ Ben poured another large glass of wine. This time he didn’t put lemonade in it. ‘Anything happen tonight?’

‘Nothing at all, love. Not a thing. Quiet as a grave it was.’ Kate raised her glass. ‘To Mackenzie. Let’s hope he bucks up a bit.’

‘To Mackenzie.’

The next week, on Kate’s tour, a man – who gave his name only as Mr Richardson – began clutching his head in the Black Mausoleum. Seconds later he pushed his way through the other tour members, staggered towards the vault doorway and collapsed. Kate punched the air in triumph when nobody was looking. The next night a girl named Sharon Ward from South Africa also tried to escape from the tomb, only to collapse in the doorway. She woke again after a couple of minutes and appeared to be none the worse for her experience, which was more than could be said for the rest of the tour party.

Afterwards, Ben decided to relocate to the pub for a stiff drink and several members of the tour party came with him. Halfway through the first round, the pub door opened and Sharon Ward entered. ‘Oh. Hi. Do you want a drink? It’s on me.’ Ben was still concerned that she might be feeling queasy – or in a mood to sue.

Sharon shook her head. ‘I was on my way back to the hotel,’ she said, ‘but my stomach felt all numb. A really weird sensation.’ She pulled up her top to show her stomach. ‘Look.’

Across her skin were raised weals – just like the marks that would be left by a clawing hand.





Sarah


Statement by Sarah Wilson, a resident of Edinburgh, who entered the Covenanters’ Prison in October 2000:

My name is Sarah and I live in Edinburgh. I have done many things, from stand-up comedy to bungee jumping, so I don’t scare easily. I have always considered myself to be sceptical when it comes to supernatural events. However, when I went on a tour to Greyfriars with a friend last year, I realised that I may have to look at things in a very different light.

In October 2000, my friend Nicola and I decided to take part in a ghost tour, which seemed like a novel way to spend an evening. We had no preconceived notions of the tour content and we assumed it would be just some actor telling us well-rehearsed stories. The tour party was a fair size, approximately 35 locals and tourists, and we enjoyed the historical content and the humour of the storytelling. When we approached Greyfriars Churchyard we were fairly geared up for the horrors that awaited us in the haunted tombs, though we really didn’t expect anything to happen.

My flat is in the Grassmarket, behind Greyfriars, and I used to go there regularly to sketch. I feel I know the graveyard really well and I have never felt or experienced anything strange there, though I had never before been in the part known as the Covenanters’ Prison.

However, on the night in question I felt that something was different. As the tour party approached the tomb, we unconsciously began to huddle together. Edinburgh in October is notoriously cold, but the air as we drew closer to the Covenanters’ Prison felt thick and clammy, as if it were stagnant. We were some way back in the group as the guide reached the prison gate and began to unlock it. Standing outside the entrance, the group’s fear seemed very strong. Grown men looked nervously in the direction we were heading and no one felt embarrassed, as we all appeared to be feeling the same dread.

Just as the guide motioned to us to move forward, we felt a strange coldness in the atmosphere. It was as if something invisible was moving through the crowd. The temperature had actually dropped, and I could swear it was difficult to breathe. My friend and I even moved to the edge of the group, so odd was the feeling.

Then one lady suddenly fell to the ground as if she had been pushed. We waited for her to get up again, but she just lay there. Looking back, the strangest thing was that no one panicked. It was as if she had been somehow picked out and the rest of us were now safe. I realised I was no longer cold and could breathe properly again. The guide ran over and checked the unconscious woman, who was beginning to show signs of life, but when she tried to stand she could not. Her boyfriend sat down with her, visibly shaken. The woman had regained enough sense to tell us she was all right, but she still could not move and complained that her legs were very cold.

Once he had made sure the woman was comfortable, the guide stood up and asked who was coming with him into the Prison. I could not believe that anyone was actually going to go, but to my amazement everyone followed him, and Nicola and I found ourselves going too! When we talked later we agreed that the realisation there might actually be something supernatural here after all fascinated us so much that we had to find out more. We did not stay in there long however, for the guide was obviously anxious to get back and check that the woman outside was all right. The rest of the tour party did not complain. I got the feeling that they felt the same as me, that if there was something supernatural in the area it was not here but behind us, back at the gate. When we got back the woman was still lying on the ground. She was conscious but still seemed unable to move, and in the end she had to be almost carried to the graveyard exit. The tour party was subdued and nervous and seemed happy to get out.

One thing has stuck in my mind from that night. As the guide walked towards the woman, right after she had fallen down, he passed a few feet from me. I heard him say to himself, ‘It’s getting stronger.’

There was one other thing I did not notice at the time. When I checked my watch later it had stopped at 9.30 p.m. – the time that the woman had collapsed.





Mute Witness


Colin Grant predicted his confrontation with the spirits of Greyfriars Kirkyard would probably kill him. Some believe it did.

‘Did the ghosts of Greyfriars drive Dad to his grave?’

EDINBURGH EVENING NEWS, 5 MAY 2000

I certainly wouldn’t rule out a paranormal explanation for what this tour has found.

LIONEL FANTHORPE (HEAD OF THE ASAP), SCOTTISH TELEVISION, MARCH 2000



Colin Grant and the psychic investigations turned out to be only the first wave of attention focused on the Mackenzie Poltergeist. Greyfriars cemetery had featured in local papers regularly since the incidents began and by March 2000 the poltergeist had begun receiving coverage from both national and international media. By this time Kate and Ben were blasé about appearing on television and giving newspaper interviews. The victims of the Mackenzie Poltergeist were not. As more and more media attention focused on them they began, understandably, to clam up. Sharon Brewster found a television crew camped outside her door the day after she gave her first newspaper interview and was harassed by a reporter from the national press when she expressed reluctance to talk to him. She called Ben Scott and told him that she would never discuss the poltergeist, or anything else for that matter, with the press again – a vow she never went back on. Other victims found themselves in similar predicaments. Some became the butt of their friends’ jokes. Those with responsible positions couldn’t take the chance that media attention of this type would attract criticism at work; there was a big difference in privately believing you had been attacked by a poltergeist and publicly admitting it.

Ben and Kate sat downstairs in the Argyll bar, the pub nearest to Kate’s house. Kate lived in Marchmont, a collection of wide, leafy streets lined with Victorian tenements. Each mansion was now divided into dozens of flats and housed a predominantly student population. This suited Kate, who was studying tourism management at university. As far as Ben could see, she had about 800 flatmates.

The Argyll was small, dark and a favoured haunt of students. Perched on a barstool, Ben looked around at the youthful crowd, a mixture of disdain and envy on his face. ‘Look at the age of these kids. I’m old enough to be their dad.’

‘You’re old enough to be my dad.’ Kate put her hand to her mouth and her eyes widened in wicked glee. ‘Sorry, love. Sorry!’

‘Only if I had you when I was 12.’

‘I wouldn’t put it past you. Sorry, love!’

Ben hunched back to his drink. ‘You’re on the ball today, aren’t you?’

Kate nodded cheerfully. ‘I am. How come you’re looking so fed up?’

Ben sighed and lifted his pint of lager as if the effort of getting it to his lips negated any pleasure he took in drinking it. ‘We’ve got a Polish television company coming in a month to do a documentary about the Mackenzie Poltergeist. Then we’ve got the US Discovery Channel a few days later. They want us to get them witnesses. Lots of witnesses. But most of the people who come on our tours are from other countries – they’re tourists, that’s the point! It doesn’t matter if they get slapped from one side of Greyfriars to the other – if they’re going to be in Lapland a few days later, they’re no use to us.’

‘Aye, I know. Nobody from Edinburgh comes on the tour. Why would they? They live here.’

‘Annie Carmichael and Sharon Brewster are the only two victims who live anywhere nearby and Sharon won’t talk.’

‘Annie?’

Ben shrugged. ‘She’s getting fed up of all the unwanted attention. She says that if she gives another interview, it will be the last time.’

Kate thought for a moment, absentmindedly rolling a cigarette. ‘Sharon Ward came up from England for that last American TV feature, but I called and she doesn’t want to talk any more. She said the press wouldn’t leave her alone.’

‘She’s quite right.’ Ben let out an exasperated sigh. ‘These people don’t want publicity. They only talk to the media because we ask them and then they get harassed or made fun of.’

Kate rummaged in her bag, pulled out a large red notebook and put it on the top of the bar. Its bright plastic cover looked out of place between the partners, both dressed head to foot in black. Ben wore a leather jacket, black jeans and engineer boots. Kate was dressed in a short black skirt, black boots and a black top. A full-length black leather coat was draped over the back of her stool. In the midst of the chattering students with their khaki combat trousers and brightly coloured shirts the guides stuck out a mile, yet they didn’t seem dressed in this sombre style as a fashion statement or to attract attention. They had the air of people who had gone for a drink after a day at work; their clothes simply reflected the line they happened to be in. Death.

Kate opened the notebook. ‘Right. Let’s see what we’ve had recently.’ She took out a pen, flicked through the pages and began to read.

‘January the second. Jennifer Hackett complained of feeling something touching her in the Black Mausoleum. She tried to leave the tomb but collapsed in the doorway. She was taken outside and revived. I didn’t get her phone number.’

‘Why not?’

‘Because she was unconscious.’

Kate marked a cross beside the entry. ‘She was really shaken, she just wanted out of the cemetery as fast as possible. Anyway, she said she was from California so that’s no use.’

‘I know, babe. Who’s next?’

‘March the third. My tour.’

‘Nothing at all for February?’ Ben frowned and peered at the book, as if this shocking lack of supernatural activity were somehow an administrative error on Kate’s part. Kate met his accusing stare with a look of indifference.

‘Ben, at the moment we only do three tours a week. It’s February. It’s freezing. There’s nobody to get attacked. Can I go on?’

‘Please do.’

‘Right. March the third. Whole bunch of the people in the vault started shouting that the temperature at the back had suddenly shot down. On the way out, some said they saw that white figure behind them.’ She read down. ‘But . . . they were from Australia. No use.’

Ben pulled a cigarette packet from his pocket and shook one loose in a burst of exasperation. It shot into the air and vanished over the bar. He looked around to make sure nobody had been watching. ‘What is this white figure, anyway?’ he said, annoyed. ‘How come nobody on my tour ever sees any white figure? Do you think it’s a dog?’

‘Not unless it’s on stilts.’

‘A homeless guy?’

‘That’s hardly going to be a white figure, is it? You can’t see your face two feet in front of you, it’s so dark in that graveyard. If it’s a homeless guy he’s wearing a glow-in-the-dark body stocking.’

‘Right. I’m glad nobody sees that on my tours. What’s next? You want a pint?’

‘Aye, please, love.’

‘Two pints of lager.’ Ben glanced at the figure pouring the drinks; he seemed familiar somehow, but Kate tugged at Ben’s arm before he could get a second look.

‘Here we go. March the fourth. A woman in her twenties insisted that something invisible was tugging at her leg. The spot she indicated was incredibly cold to the touch.’

‘Boring.’

‘True. Right. March the thirty-first. Catherine Greig claimed something was touching her face in the Black Mausoleum. When you shone the flashlight on her there was a handprint on her cheek, just like something had gripped her face.’

‘That was a cracking one!’ Ben smiled at the memory. ‘But she didn’t want to talk about it. Some people just don’t know how to enjoy themselves.’

‘April the twenty-second. My tour. A Mr Richardson complained of an agonising pain in his head. I remember that. He staggered out of the vault and collapsed outside.’

‘What was his first name?’

‘Mr.’

‘Great.’

‘Doesn’t matter. He was American. Was going back to the US a couple of days later. No use.’

‘May the sixteenth, Derek’s tour. A female visitor collapsed in the Black Mausoleum.’

‘Did he get her name?’

‘She was taken away in an ambulance.’

‘Damn!’

Kate looked at the page and began to read again.

‘May the nineteenth. Chandra Markham suddenly felt freezing cold. Collapsed just outside the Black Mausoleum. Quite willing to be interviewed.’

‘Yes!’

‘She also lives in California.’

The barman put their pints down beside them and began to wipe the bar with a towel. He seemed to be trying his best to hear their conversation, but Ben and Kate were too wrapped up in the business at hand to notice.

‘May the twentieth.’ Kate tapped the page again and read. ‘Jan Reese felt something freezing cold touching her head. Her face stayed numb with cold for some hours afterwards.’

Ben’s face split into a grin.

‘I called her. She’ll talk and she actually lives in Scotland. Just outside Aberdeen. She’ll come to town and talk on TV as long as someone pays her train fare and she can get a babysitter for her kids.’

‘Superb. Shame she didn’t collapse though.’

Kate and Ben Scott’s attitude towards the visitors had changed, though they hardly realised it. They weren’t about to admit to the possibility that they might be leading people into danger, so the whole thing had become a gruesome game. They dressed in long black leather coats like some entertainment Gestapo. They took people into the graveyard and whatever happened, happened. They were just doing their job.

‘May the twenty-fifth, my tour.’ Kate took a gulp of her pint. ‘We got into the tomb and all of a sudden there was a loud knocking noise in there with us.’

‘Somebody kicking the wall?’

‘No. It seemed to come from all around.’

‘Boring.’

‘Well this is a great one. May the twenty-eighth, multiple sighting. At least six people felt cold spots and two of them had scratches on their body after the tour. The rapping noises were in the tomb again and this time they came from the roof!’

‘Don’t tell me. The entire tour was from Outer Mongolia.’

‘Close enough. American, Australian and Dutch. June the eighteenth, a Danielle Ness claimed she heard voices whispering to her from the back of the Black Mausoleum, only there wasn’t anyone behind her. Next day she had bruises down her leg.’

‘USA?’

‘USA.’

‘Another one? Has the poltergeist got something against the locals?’

‘It’s certainly got a thing for Californians.’ Kate put the cap back on her pen and tapped her lip. ‘It’s a month until the next TV crew get here; something’s bound to happen before that.’ She pointed the pen at Ben and made little jabbing motions. ‘We have to start getting the names and addresses of everyone this thing goes after. Every single one.’

This was another change. Despite their disbelief, Ben and Kate now described the poltergeist in terms of a predatory entity, rather than a collection of odd phenomena. They talked of ‘attacks’ rather than ‘incidents’.

Ben took an angry drag on his cigarette and spurted a stream of smoke across the bar. It sailed into the face of the barman, who was leaning over to get a better look at what was written in the notebook. He recoiled, coughing.

‘Why do we have to take their names and addresses? We’re a ghost tour, not a bloody investigation into the half-baked side of life.’

‘We need proper proof.’

‘Proof of what?’

Kate tilted her head to one side and brushed a strand of hair out of her mouth. She picked up the notebook and held it up. ‘It seems to come in spurts. Nothing for a month or two, then all hell breaks loose.’

‘A very apt metaphor.’

‘You’ve got to admit, this is pretty weird, Ben.’

‘Aye,’ Ben sighed and rubbed his eyes. ‘I know.’

‘You’re tired.’ Kate reached out and put an affectionate hand on Ben’s shoulder. The pen jabbed in his ear. ‘Sorry.’

‘S’all right. I am tired.’

Though City of the Dead was successful, it was far too small a business to support both Ben and Kate. Consequently Ben worked full time in an office as well as running the tours.

‘I know. It’s not easy working all day, then being one of only two tour guides at night.’

Ben patted her hand. ‘It can’t be easy for you either, being a full-time student and having to go to one lecture a week.’

Kate’s eyes flashed. ‘I work bloody hard at college, and you know it!’

Ben couldn’t tell if she was genuinely annoyed, but he looked apologetic just in case. ‘Anyway, there are three tour guides,’ he corrected.

‘Two.’ It was Kate’s turn to look apologetic. ‘Derek’s leaving. It’s just you and me again.’

Ben rubbed his eyes once more.

‘What for? It wasn’t those cuts, was it?’ Derek had finished a tour the week before with scratches on his body that he could not remember acquiring.

‘No. He got a job working with computers. He loves working with computers.’ Kate’s expression indicated that she thought working with computers was as much fun as working with sewage.

‘Great.’ Ben rubbed his whole face to emphasise just how tired this new development would make him. ‘Now we need to find a new tour guide.’

‘Excuse me.’ The barman leaned over. He had an open face, very young, topped with a thick tuft of black hair. ‘If you’re looking for a new tour guide, I’m the very person you want. I’d love to do something like that.’ The barman smiled. He had an easy, friendly quality and, whether it was genuine or not, Ben and Kate recognised it immediately. Likeability – a tour guide’s greatest asset.

‘Let me get you another drink,’ the barman said. ‘It’s on me.’ He turned and fetched glasses.

‘A free beer,’ Kate hissed. ‘He’s hired.’

The barman glanced back. ‘It’s Ben and Kate, isn’t it?’

‘Yeah. And I know you,’ Ben wagged a finger. ‘You used to be the barman down at Bannerman’s bar. In Niddry Street.’

The barman nodded and held out his hand. ‘I did. Yes. Name’s David Pollock.’





Roy


Written statement by Roy Hutchison, an electrician from Leeds, England. Roy was in the Covenanters’ Prison on 15 November 2000.

I have never been interested in the supernatural and tend to think it’s all a lot of rubbish. I came on the City of the Dead tour because I was interested in the history of Edinburgh and of Greyfriars, and I enjoyed that part. The supernatural stuff was well done, I suppose, and the stories were good fun but, as I said, there was no way I was going to believe in any of it.

In the Black Mausoleum my girlfriend, Joan, was getting all nervous and I thought to myself again how daft it was that people acted that way in the dark. Everyone was very close together because there were only about ten of us and I was standing on the right-hand side. Then something very cold grabbed my hand and let go again. At least, that’s exactly what it felt like and it wasn’t Joan because she was holding my other arm with both hands. There was nobody else near enough to touch me. I jumped but didn’t say anything. I thought it had to be a trick, but I couldn’t work out how it was done. When I came out of the vault I looked at my hand. There was a two-inch cut down the back of it. Not a scratch – a deep cut, which was bleeding badly. Later I took a photograph of it.

I have gone over and over this in my mind. Though I am totally reluctant to say that this was something supernatural, I can come up with absolutely no logical explanation for how it could have happened.





And . . . Cut!


There is no doubt that there is something supernatural . . . I felt it myself.

MACIEJ TROJANOWSKI, PRESENTER, UNBELIEVABLE, POLISH NATIONAL TV, JULY 2000



Maciej Trojanowski and his television crew set up their cameras outside the Black Mausoleum. The light was fading fast but they had two portable, battery-operated lights and were attaching them to tripods outside the door of the tomb. Maciej and the crew had flown over from Poland to film an episode of their popular national show, Unbelievable, the subject of this particular unbelievable episode being the Mackenzie Poltergeist. In the morning they had taken in the sights and sounds of Edinburgh, shooting the Old Town’s stunning medieval skyline and a few narrow wynds for inclusion in their show. Then they went to Greyfriars to interview Ben Scott and some of the poltergeist victims.

It had been a beautiful July day. The sun streamed from a cloudless sky, the graveyard trees were crammed with glossy olive leaves and flowers sprouted carelessly in patches of soil between headstones. The north-eastern slope of the graveyard even had a heat haze and the tallest tombstones shimmered as though they were halfway between this world and a more mystical one. Maciej and Jan sat on the grass in their shirtsleeves and matching sunglasses listening to the birds. A hundred yards away a family were wandering between the graves. Now and then the mother would point to a particularly intricate gravestone and a child would run, laughing, from a skull carved into some shadowy recess. The shouts of pupils at play in the Heriot School grounds drifted on the sunny air over the graveyard wall. At the gates of the Covenanters’ Prison, the three-strong Polish crew – who appeared to be called Jan, Jan and Jan – were filming one of the poltergeist victims, also called Jan.

In these beautiful surroundings, with the air hot and the breeze calming, the city out of sight and very nearly out of mind, it was hard to imagine that anything bad could happen here. On a day like this it was hard to imagine that anything bad could happen anywhere.

Maciej Trojanowski, the presenter of Unbelievable, was a tall, imposing figure with a balding head and a rangy, athletic physique. He was a direct man with a direct stare and, every time they talked, Ben felt he should keep checking there wasn’t some dirty mark on his face that Maciej was examining. Ben liked Maciej Trojanowski. His name was pronounced ‘Magic’, or something very close, and there was a touch of that about his demeanour; his companionship seemed somehow both comforting and slightly frightening. Ben realised it was like meeting the teacher he had feared most at school, only now he was 37 and able to handle it. Almost.

‘So,’ Maciej said sternly. ‘Do you have an explanation for what is going on in this graveyard?’

‘No. I have no idea.’

‘That will not do for the TV show.’

‘Sorry.’

Sentences sounded funny coming from this large, austere man. The presenter’s grasp of English was excellent, but his diction was clipped and the words distorted by his thick Polish accent. It suddenly occurred to Ben that Maciej sounded like Count Dracula. He could see the tall Pole rising from behind a grave, silk cloak trailing behind, scaring the living daylights out of passing tours by shouting ‘I am vun off de Undaaaaaaaaaahd!’

‘The graveyard’s been a bit disappointing recently,’ Ben said. ‘We’ve gone all the way through June, one of our busiest months, and not a thing. Not a peep. Nobody felt funny. No cuts. No collapses. We’ve just finished training a new tour guide, David Pollock. We told him all about the creepy things that happen in here. He’s going to think we’re idiots.’

‘Well, we will shoot in the Black Mausoleum tonight. Perhaps the poltergeist will be caught on film.’

‘Oh, I’m sure it will.’ Ben couldn’t have sounded less sincere if he had been promising the poltergeist would sing a few numbers from The Sound of Music.

Now it was 11.00 p.m. but not particularly dark. Edinburgh was on roughly the same latitude as Moscow and its northern setting meant that even at a late hour the summer sky was deep blue rather than black. Of course, the city made up for this in the winter months by looking like the middle of the night from 3.00 p.m. onwards. In the Covenanters’ Prison, the camera crew had finished setting up their equipment and were talking softly to each other in Polish. The burning embers of their cigarettes flickered and jumped in the dark at every gesture accompanying their words. They leaped to their feet at the sound of the approaching tour.

At the other end of the prison, David unlocked the gates and led his whispering tour party down the dark passage of tombs towards the cameras. The visitors blinked and winced as they passed through the harsh light of the spots, only to be plunged into the darkness of the Black Mausoleum. Once they were all inside the tomb David launched into his favourite story and the camera crew began lugging equipment back towards the gate for a long shot of the tour emerging from the vault.

‘We will not take the camera into the tomb, no,’ Maciej had explained to Ben that afternoon. ‘We are a small unit with only one camera. We do not wish the poltergeist to break it.’

Ben looked at him quizzically. With that accent it was hard to tell when Maciej was joking. Maciej kept a poker face. ‘No. What it is . . . we do not want to spoil the atmosphere for your paying visitors. And we do not want one of them to panic and knock over our cameramen and lights. This is possible, no?’

‘It is definitely possible. Yes.’

‘Then we will wait outside. When the tour is finished with this Black Mausoleum, we will ask some of the party to go back in and we will film then.’

‘Good luck persuading them to go in twice.’

Maciej gave a dismissive wave of his hand. ‘It is television,’ he said grandly. ‘Everyone wants to be on television. Especially on Polish television.’

Ben Scott smiled again. He liked Maciej Trojanowski.

Suddenly there was a scream and a collective gasp from inside the Black Mausoleum. The startled film crew spun round to face the way they had come. David Pollock’s head popped round the side of the tomb door, his expression of surprise turning to one of annoyance as he spotted the faraway Poles. ‘What are you doing up there with the camera?’ he admonished. ‘We’ve got a collapse!’

The woman who had gone down was a student visiting from France, Christine Deveraux. She had suddenly become freezing cold in the vault and the next thing she remembered was waking up outside. David had acted quickly and efficiently, delegating the four tour members who looked least terrified to carry the stricken girl out of the tomb. The guides faced a dilemma over collapses; each was trained in emergency first aid and knew that an unconscious person shouldn’t be moved, but they also knew that a frightened crowd was a danger to a prone victim, and that the filthy floor of a pitch-black vault was the worst place for someone unconscious to be lying. So, once they had checked the person was breathing, the tour guide gently moved any collapsed person the few feet it took to reach the grass and cool air outside. Invariably the victim woke up as soon as they were taken out, just as those who fled, terrified or nauseous, felt better as soon as they exited the tomb. Christine Deveraux was no exception and opened her eyes almost immediately. As soon as she was able to stand, the television crew led the shaking girl to one side, firing excited questions at her – which she couldn’t understand because they were talking in Polish.

‘Well, Mackenzie,’ David said to the empty tomb, his heart beating fast. ‘I get to meet you at last . . . You’re quite a showman too.’

David led his party, now very quiet, from the Covenanters’ Prison to the cemetery exit and was bidding them goodnight when Maciej Trojanowski strode over, balding pate glistening in the moonlight. He had Christine Deveraux in tow.

‘Wonderful,’ he said happily to the assembled crowd. ‘Now, if we could take you all back into the tomb for a few minutes, we will film a re-enactment of what happened.’

‘You’ve got to be kidding!’ David looked at him wide-eyed. The tour party seemed to share his opinion.

‘It will be exciting. No?’

‘That’s one way of putting it.’

‘Come, ladies and gentlemen.’ Maciej turned his considerable charm on the group. ‘You will be on national television.’ He indicated Christine Deveraux. ‘Even this young lady is willing to go back in and act out the scene for us again. She is brave, yes?’

Maciej had obviously worked his charm on Christine, though the young French girl looked more resigned than heroic. Not only was she going back to face the Mackenzie Poltergeist, she was also going to have to take another nosedive onto the dirty tomb floor.

‘People! Who will come with me?’ Maciej sounded like Moses setting off for the Promised Land.

A group of about five came forward, giggling nervously.

‘This will do, yes,’ said Maciej, smiling broadly.

The re-enactment must have been one of the fastest shoots in cinema history. David herded the small group, along with the cameramen, back into the Black Mausoleum. Christine Deveraux fell down and everyone left the vault at a brisk trot, carrying the fallen Frenchwoman a lot less carefully than they had last time.

‘Cut!’ said Maciej Trojanowski, with a flourish. The tour party dropped Christine and instinctively checked their arms and hands in case the Pole was referring to any marks there.

Christine Deveraux turned out to be made of stern stuff after all for, a few days later, she turned up on Ben Scott’s tour. But her resolve did not last. As Ben opened the gates to the Covenanters’ Prison, he noticed that she was no longer with the group. He did not see her again.

Wilson Chapel stood in his garden with a hammer in his hand and looked at the shed he had built. He should have been pleased; it might not be a big shed but it was sturdy and well made. For some reason, though, Wilson really didn’t like it. It wasn’t the building itself, he thought. It was where he had been forced to put it. The garden wasn’t large, and the left-hand corner was the only logical place a structure like that would fit. For months there had been a pile of debris piled on that very spot and Wilson had never quite got round to shifting it. Now he didn’t have to. Two weeks ago the whole lot had gone up in flames, a blaze so severe that three fire engines had been called to battle it and Wilson and his partner Angela had been forced to flee their home.

No . . . it wasn’t the shed Wilson disliked, it was what was right behind it; the little wooden structure was built against the garden wall and on the other side was Greyfriars Kirkyard. A visitor to the house would not have been able to tell this, for the wall was much too high to see over, were there not one obvious clue – rising above the barrier, topped with its ugly fat acorn of stone, was the mausoleum of George Mackenzie. It towered over the shed like a mocking shadow, ancient, impressive and sinister and, no matter where the sun stood in the sky, the little wooden building always seemed to be in its shade.

Wilson sat on the garden bench and drank a mug of tea. Through the kitchen window he could see Angela pouring herself a cup, unaware that he was looking at her. Yet she had complained of being watched several times, not by Wilson, but by something she couldn’t quite see – something she was sure stared through the window at her whenever she was alone.

This conviction had begun right after the fire, though Angela was not the type to give in to flights of fancy and neither was Wilson. He was a mechanic, a man who took things apart and put them together again until he knew exactly what was wrong. He wasn’t sure what was wrong with the shed. All he knew was that he too got an uneasy sensation whenever he was inside.

Never mind. He was a practical man and he knew the feeling would pass.

A few days after the Polish TV crew had gone, the US Discovery channel crew arrived to shoot their version of the poltergeist tale. Once again, Ben Scott and Kate Kavanagh found themselves back in Greyfriars telling their story.

‘If I spend any more time in here with film crews I’m going to get a chair with my name on the back,’ Ben muttered.

Kate was lying full length on a flat tomb, hair fanned out around her face, soaking up the sun. Dressed all in black for the cameras, she looked more like a devil worshipper than a sun worshipper, or a vampire who hadn’t made it back to her coffin before dawn caught her. Kate didn’t care. In her mind, heaven had sand and deckchairs and was somewhere off the coast of Greece.

‘Stop complaining, love,’ she said lazily. ‘It’s a beautiful day and you’ve got away from your daytime work and out into the fresh air.’

‘The sun gives me a headache.’

‘That’s called a hangover, Ben.’

This crew was going for a larger shoot than the small Polish unit could manage and the skeletons of tripods and frames were strewn around the gates of the Covenanters’ Prison. Several costumes were hung neatly on tombstones.

‘They’re filming enactments of Covenanters being persecuted by George Mackenzie,’ Ben complained. ‘Like that has anything to do with anything! I told them the poltergeist wasn’t named after George Mackenzie, that it’s named after his tomb because that’s where the first attack took place. What do they care?’

Kate stretched happily and yawned. ‘I think the costumes look nice,’ she said, knowing this would annoy Ben even more. It worked.

‘The Covenanters are dressed in monks’ robes!’ he ranted. ‘What would people who hate Catholics be doing dressed like Friar Tuck? And there’s only four of them.’

‘I don’t think they can afford to pay 1,200 extras just to satisfy your need for accuracy.’

‘The guy dressed as Mackenzie looks like a judge.’

‘George Mackenzie was a judge.’

‘Not in some bad TV sitcom.’

Kate pointed languidly to where two backpackers were sitting eating a sandwich, a tranquil enough picture were it not for the fact that both seemed to be bleeding from severe head wounds. ‘They’re re-enacting a couple of poltergeist attacks too. That’s quite good.’

‘I know. I saw them filming it.’ Ben wasn’t about to stop his tirade. It was making his hangover feel better. ‘The entire McDonald’s franchise doesn’t have that much ketchup. The Mackenzie Poltergeist scratches people, it doesn’t tear them limb from limb. It was like watching The Texas Chainsaw Massacre.’

Kate rolled over to expose her other side to the sun. ‘I know, love. Why don’t you go and tell them how to do it properly?’

‘Aye. I’ll go see what the Cecil B. De Mille gang are up to now.’ Ben shouldered his leather jacket and sloped off to the Covenanters’ Prison, where Jan Reese and Annie Carmichael, two of the poltergeist victims, were being interviewed.

Jan Reese was sitting on the grass opposite the Black Mausoleum. A small woman in her mid-thirties with liquid brown eyes, she looked a little like Sue-Ellen from the soap opera Dallas. She also looked pale and shaken.

Ben stopped. ‘You went back into the Black Mausoleum for your interview, didn’t you?’

Jan nodded an affirmative. Maciej Trojanowski had interviewed her the week before, but even his powers of persuasion hadn’t been enough to get her back inside the tomb. This time, it seemed, she had relented.

‘Wish you hadn’t?’

Jan nodded again. Then she burst into a sunny smile, laughing at her own foolishness, or just enjoying being out of the tomb and back in the light. Across from her, the Black Mausoleum looked as grainy as a faded photograph, the interior a squat hole that had never felt a ray of sun.

Ben patted Jan on the shoulder and walked a little further to where Dan the American director was talking to Annie Carmichael. The camera crew were taking a break, scattered around the Covenanter’s Prison with the rest of the equipment and sipping coffees from polystyrene containers.

Annie Carmichael was a tall, slim woman, well dressed with short dark hair and, like Jan Reese, had striking eyes, this time faded cobalt blue. As Ben walked past he could hear her describing her experience to the director. ‘I was standing in the vault when I suddenly felt cold,’ Annie was saying in a cultured voice. ‘It seemed that something was touching the back of my head. Then, when I got out of the tomb, someone noticed that I had a cut down the back of my neck.’

‘Well, I’ll be damned!’

Dan sounded genuinely bowled over. Ben smiled to himself. Americans. You had to love them. He turned back, intending to point out that the Mackenzie Poltergeist was capable of far more spectacular stuff than one cut. The director beckoned to him, eyes wide. ‘Willya take a look at this,’ he said as Ben walked over. There was a red weal down the back of Annie Carmichael’s neck. ‘That wasn’t there a second ago,’ Dan said in puzzlement. ‘I was watching and it suddenly appeared.’ He looked anxiously around. ‘Where’s the damned camera?’ He turned and waved violently at the camera crew. They sipped their coffee and waved happily back.

‘Don’t bother,’ said Ben. ‘It’s gone again.’

It had. Suddenly there was no blemish on Annie’s shapely neck. Ben was almost convinced he had imagined it. The director looked at him, a mixture of puzzlement and disbelief in his eyes.

Ben shrugged.

‘Loves attention. Doesn’t love the camera.’

Annie Carmichael gave no more interviews.





David


David Pollock is a tour guide taking visitors into Greyfriars Graveyard. He has done so since June 2000. This statement was taken in March 2001.

The first genuinely spooky event on my tours was in July 2000 and I’ll probably remember it for the rest of my life. After it happened, I even thought about quitting my job, though I’m glad I didn’t. I’ve met many interesting people and though I can’t explain the things I’ve seen, I now think it is great that I’ve seen them.

It was early July and a nice Scottish night – the wind was howling and it was freezing. We were making the best of optimum tour conditions, ‘we’ being about 35 visitors and myself. We were having a pretty good time, laughing and joking. Then we entered the tomb. I set the scene with a few creepy stories. I couldn’t really tell them much about the poltergeist, as I hadn’t yet done many tours, but I noticed that there was suddenly a very definite change amongst the party. Before there had been some good-natured heckling, now there was only the occasional nervous giggle, or an over-loud guffaw from one of the more image-conscious Australian blokes. The entire tour moved closer together. I was quite pleased. I thought it was me.

To crank up the scary-juice a bit, I switched off my torch, the only source of illumination in the tomb. With the sudden plunge into darkness, there came a bizarre deadening of my voice. I noticed it immediately and so did the crowd; it was like someone had turned off the echo in a sound chamber. My voice is loud anyway and in the tomb it’s even easier to hear. But now, instead of impressing the tourists with my storytelling ability, I sounded as though I was talking through a gas mask. Weird. I was so astonished I even stopped speaking, and that doesn’t happen very often.

I restarted my tale, this time pacing backwards and forwards. The tour was listening more to the sounds than the words, which normally would have ticked me off, but now I was doing it as well. It seemed like there were dead spots in various points in the tomb, places that squashed the sound flat. OK, I thought. What’s one more quirk in the world’s most haunted tour? Kate and Ben had told me to expert weird things, and the crowd was certainly impressed. Bring it on, I thought – the more they’re scared the bigger they tip.

Suddenly a deep low noise was emitted from the wall of the tomb. It sounded like a groan of pain. The noise rose in volume for perhaps 20 seconds then cut off. There was silence apart from the breathing of the crowd. Some people seemed afraid, some were just blank – and the rest were trying to figure out how I had done it.

There was nobody standing anywhere near the source of the groan, including me. I brushed it off with a joke. ‘Sorry. Must have been something I ate.’

What else could I do?

The faces relaxed, but I was starting to feel really strange and things were definitely not under my control. That’s no way for a tour guide to feel and when one member suggested we finish as quickly as possible and go to the nearest bar instead, I was in full agreement. Soon we were out of the wind and ensconced around the fire of Greyfriars pub.

The first topic up for discussion was, of course, what went on in the tomb. I discovered that although roughly half the tour party had heard exactly what I had and were twice as freaked, the other half had heard nothing at all. I found myself talking to a big Glaswegian. He had muscles like balloons and looked as hard as steel-toe. I remembered seeing him at the back wall of the tomb. ‘Aye, I spent the hale time standing at the back. And that’s whar the noise came frae. A big groan, ken, like some dude’s had a serious hiding. I’m actually in charge o’ maintenance fir the largest cemetery in Scotland. And let me tell ye ah’ve never bin sae afraid in ma life as I was an hour ago.’

I was on my way to Canada at the end of July and the final tour before my trip was a busy one – over 50, due to the fact that I’d miscalculated tour numbers.

We reached the prison gates. I gave my usual warning, undid the padlock and everyone went in. As soon as one man walked through the gates he started sobbing hysterically then collapsed unconscious on the ground. His friends tried to bring him round, but it was not until we carried him out of the prison that he became anything like coherent.

‘You all right mate? Anything hurt? No broken bones?’ I tried to be as sympathetic as possible, especially since the victim was six foot tall. ‘Had a few to drink, eh?’

‘No. Nothing at all. I’ve got my car with me! What the hell just happened?’

I had to admit I didn’t have a clue. He tried to stand but his legs were having none of it, especially since the direction they were supposed to go was farther into the Covenanters’ Prison. He refused point blank to be checked out medically, but allowed his mates to help him back to his car. That was the last I saw of them.

I was told in no uncertain terms that 24 people would go no further, and they strode off en masse towards the graveyard exit. In a way that was pretty handy because, when I took the rest to the Black Mausoleum, there was now room for them all. ‘Well, folks, I guess that leaves just us. And the ghost.’ I figure it never does any harm to crank it up a notch. However, after five minutes in the tomb, there had been several complaints about cold spots and people being touched and one blood-curdling scream from a woman at the back.

‘Shall we just leave?’ I finally asked.

‘Hell, yes!’ said the crowd.

Canada was singing sweetly to me.

I actually went to my boss, Ben, and told him I was thinking of quitting. Ben can be very persuasive. I stayed.

It was quite a start to my tour guide career.

There have been other ‘incidents’ since then, but that first month was really something. I wonder sometimes how much I miss as well. Two young American girls met Kate at the tour sign and told her they had been grabbed in the Black Mausoleum by ‘cold invisible hands’. They now sported an array of bruises around their upper arms and thighs. I had done the tour and hadn’t even noticed that anything was going on.

Oh yes. I’ve had seven more people collapsing due to cold spots.

It’s not me.

Honest.





The Pheromone Theory


No one has been able to offer an explanation for these attacks, but local newspapers took photographs of some of the victims, who reported deep cuts and bruises . . . Many wonder why this evil creature assaults and attacks some visitors and not others – but the tour guides have their own theory.

‘HAUNTED HISTORY: EDINBURGH’, THE US HISTORY CHANNEL, 22 SEPTEMBER 2000



Ben Scott moved into his graveyard dwelling in the summer of 2000. It was coincidence that he had found a place with a view over Greyfriars, not a morbid desire to look down on death, and it was undeniably handy for the tours. The flat was part of the eighteenth-century tenements in Candlemaker Row. From the street it was necessary to climb four flights of spiral stairs to reach Ben’s front door. Walk through the apartment, however, and the two latticed windows looked out over a headstone-dotted vista only seven feet below. There was even a tomb built into the wall directly underneath the windowsill.

Some of Ben’s friends had expressed misgivings about his choice of location. One of them, looking across the maze of graves, voiced what many visitors secretly thought. ‘It would give me the creeps staying here.’ She wrinkled her nose, as if she could smell corpses. ‘Doesn’t it give you the creeps?’

‘It’s just a big garden,’ said Ben. ‘Only, filled with dead people.’

All the same, he made it a rule never to watch a horror film if he was going to be sleeping alone.

David Pollock sat on the window seat in Ben’s new apartment. He looked unhappy and fidgeted with his short beard. Only 21, David’s youthful face had prompted him to grow a goatee in an attempt to make himself appear older. Now he didn’t look a day under 17.

Night was falling on the city of the dead outside and the sky was darkening through the panes behind him. He had drank tea with Ben and chatted, but Ben wasn’t much for chatting and David obviously had something else on his mind. Through the window the tombstones slowly faded and David’s reflection strengthened on the glass, until the two images blended into a macabre Maigrit figure with headstones for medals.

David Pollock was worried. A natural showman, he had been delighted to discover that he could scare people with his powers of oration. He had been delighted when Christine Deveraux collapsed on his tour in front of a TV crew. He had even been delighted at the prospect of being on Polish national television, even if the programme had called him Ben Scott by mistake. But he had not been delighted at the events of the last month.

A few days after the Polish shoot, on 14 July, an American radio operator named Kyle Plackmeyer claimed to have been attacked in the Black Mausoleum by what he took to be the Mackenzie Poltergeist. It was David’s tour. Four days later David and a few of his tour party heard a low growling coming from the vault wall. Less than a week after that, there was a multiple sighting; three women – Austrian, Irish and Serbian, and all strangers to each other – panicked when they felt something brushing against their faces. The sensations they felt were accompanied by a sudden and extreme drop in the temperature of the vault. It was David’s tour. Four days later a man collapsed as David reached the gates of the Covenanters’ Prison. It was the first collapse to happen outside the Black Mausoleum since the tours began.

On 29 July, one week later, Charity Pirkle from the US was hit in the side by something she could not see and then felt something she likened to a man’s hand in a thick glove grabbing her foot. David Pollock was the tour guide.

David was worried.

‘I don’t know if I should quit the tours,’ he said eventually. The windows behind him were now black. ‘I don’t know if I’m doing something wrong.’

Judging by the incredible frequency of incidents on David’s tours, Ben Scott had no doubt that his new tour guide was doing something very right. As company director he leapt into action. ‘Have a beer,’ he said.

‘No thanks.’

‘Right. Glass of wine it is.’ He marched into the kitchen and opened the fridge. There were four bottles of Sauvignon Blanc and half a pound of cheese.

‘My parents are quite religious, you know?’ David continued. ‘They think that exploiting the dead is a pretty bad thing.’

‘What do they want you to do?’ Ben emerged from the kitchen with a bottle and two half-pint glasses. ‘Dig a hole at the end of each tour and drop in a percentage?’ He fought for a while with a cheap plastic corkscrew that bent every time he pushed it into the cork.

‘I talked to my girlfriend about it too,’ David said. ‘She’s freaked out. Am I disturbing something I shouldn’t?’

‘Think of it this way.’ Ben put on his most reasonable voice. ‘Every day there’s guys out in Greyfriars on their lunch hour, eating pizza and using those flat gravestones as tables.’ He gave up on the corkscrew and attacked the cork with a screwdriver. ‘There’s one over there catches a lot of sun and it’s got a wee hole in it where you can put your juice.’ The screwdriver shot into the bottle and a little spout of wine bubbled over Ben’s fingers. ‘There are schoolkids from Heriot use the cemetery as a shortcut. At night you even get homeless guys sleeping there.’

‘You do?’

‘Well. No. Not since the poltergeist thing started.’

Ben filled the half-pint glasses with wine and got off that particular subject.

‘Listen. St Giles’ Cathedral, down on the Royal Mile, it used to have a graveyard,’ he said. ‘So did St Leonards. Now one’s a car park and the other is a police station. It’s no big deal.’

David brightened a little at this. Then he remembered why he felt so bad in the first place. ‘When I started, you and Kate told me about all the things that happened on the tours. And you said not much ever happened to Derek.’

‘Not much.’ Ben thought back. ‘He’s the only one who ever got cut, if that’s any help.’

‘So most incidents happened on your and Kate’s tours.’

‘True.’

‘How many attacks have you had on your tours in the month since I started?’

Ben Scott thought carefully.

‘Ehm . . . none.’

‘On Kate’s?’

‘Oooh. I’d say about . . . hmmm . . .’

‘None?’

‘Yeah. None.’

David took a couple of large gulps and began to roll a cigarette before plunging back into the fray.

‘In the last month I’ve had six attacks on my tours.’ He licked a cigarette paper and peered over the top at Ben. ‘These are the big ones I’m talking about, I’m not counting all the people who just refused to go in or felt spooked.’

Ben raised his glass in salute.

‘You’re certainly heading for our employee of the month certificate.’

David saluted him back, but he still looked troubled.

‘What if there really is something in there, Ben? Something bad.’

‘If there is, it likes you just fine.’

‘That’s what I mean.’ David lit his cigarette and shook the match furiously, animated now that a doorway had been opened to the idea lurking at the back of his mind. ‘All of a sudden it’s like it switched from you to me. It’s like I’m some kind of . . . I don’t know. A focus.’

Ben winced inwardly at David’s choice of phrase, though he had been thinking exactly the same thing.

‘I’m not bothered about cuts and scratches or even people falling down,’ David said gamely. ‘But what if I make it stronger? What if it’s something evil and I help it to get . . . what? Get out? Get bigger? I don’t know.’

‘David. You are not going to be attacked by a poltergeist on a ghost tour. Honestly.’

David only shrugged. ‘You don’t know for sure though, do you?’ He took another big gulp of wine. ‘I heard a laugh in that tomb! It’s not all tourists’ imaginations. You haven’t got a good explanation for what’s happening.’

‘Actually, I have,’ Ben said proudly. ‘Nothing to do with demons or spirits or electromagnets or psychokinesis or all that nonsense either. I made it up myself.’

‘You’ve been thinking about it then?’ David smiled.

‘My house looks into a cemetery famous for an active poltergeist. I piss it off every night by taking visitors to gawk round its home. If it does exist, it probably holds a bit of a grudge against me personally.’ Ben moved David out of the way and pulled the blind down. ‘You’d be surprised at the things I think about.’

Then he told David Pollock his Pheromone Theory.

Pheromones (pronounced ‘fair-uh-moans’) are types of hormones, chemicals that living organisms release in order to communicate with other members of their own species. In many ways pheromones are more effective than sight or sound signals, for they do not fade quickly and are effective over a long range. The first pheromone was discovered in 1952 and was found in the glands of female silkworm moths. Called ‘bombykol’, the substance could attract male moths over huge distances. The scientist Lewis Thomas wrote in The Lives of A Cell:

It has been soberly calculated that if a single female moth were to release all the bombykol in her sac in a single spray, all at once, she could theoretically attract a trillion males in that instant.



Insect pheromones, as well as attracting the opposite sex, have other functions. Ants can lay down a ‘trail pheromone’ that attracts and guides other ants to any food they have found. But more importantly, when an ant is attacked or disturbed it can release an ‘alarm pheromone’. This type of pheromone is detected by other ants in the area and makes them extremely agitated. They, too, begin to release alarm pheromones, making the cumulative distress stronger and spreading it farther, and they continue to do so until the danger has gone. Ants are hardly the most emotional creatures on the earth, but what they are creating is little more than chemically induced fear.

A 1971 study by scientist Martha McClintock suggested that human pheromones might be responsible for the strange phenomenon whereby human females living together developed synchronised menstrual cycles. In 1986, she was proved right when Dr Winifred Cutler of the Athena Institute documented positive existence of pheromones in humans. It may be an old myth, but it seems that there really is a physical, sexual chemistry between people.

If that is true, there may be other types of undetected pheromone chemistry between human beings. As Martha McLintock wrote:

In other species there are many other types of pheromones, not dependent on ovarian function . . . well-controlled studies of humans are now needed to determine whether there are other types of pheromones with effects that are as far-reaching in humans as they are in other species.



	 Pheromones may explain the extreme behaviour that is often observed in large groups of people. Mass hysteria, mass indoctrination, mass violence – all might be the result of pheromones spreading through a group and influencing the individuals within that group. And, if there is an alarm pheromone in humans, it might be used to transmit fear in exactly the same way.

David looked impressed.

‘That’s an interesting theory.’

‘Thank you. I’m working on turning base metals into gold next week.’

‘I just don’t see what it has to do with the poltergeist.’

Ben sighed and poured himself another glass of wine.

‘Right. Consider this,’ he said, in his best storytelling voice. ‘Ants. Ants. With legs. And feet.’

He paused and looked at David expectantly.

‘Yes. I get that part.’

‘All right.’ Ben tapped his glass against his teeth and thought for a second. ‘Right. Imagine it’s the ’70s and you’re going out clubbing. It was called the disco, in my day.’

‘Did you have flares?’

‘I was a punk rocker, but you’re on the right track. Let’s assume, for the sake of the theory, that I am the John Travolta type. I have on my best Crimpeine shirt and polyester trousers and all my friends come over in matching outfits, including your girlfriend because she wants me.’

David sighed.

‘It’s your theory.’

‘Exactly. So . . . we all start dancing on my polypropylene carpet in our nylon socks.’

‘I’ve been to parties like that.’ David grinned.

‘I don’t want to know. Anyway. Put together all that shuffling around and man-made fibre and you can build up enough static electricity to power a Ford Capri. Then one of us gets out a comb and touches someone else. Bang!’ Ben thumped the table loudly in the manner of a mad scientist.

‘Ah,’ David nodded slowly. ‘Now I really don’t understand where this is going.’

‘OK,’ Ben sighed. ‘Imagine the same thing with pheromones. Get a group of people in an enclosed stone mausoleum every night. Make them afraid. They release alarm pheromones. These pheromones can’t go anywhere, they build up in concentration – maybe even join with the emissions from the night before – and that makes the party release even more pheromones, until finally there’s enough of a concentration to actually overcome a member of the tour party. It might make them hear things or feel cold or sick, or even knock them out. It could even cause a reaction that would mark their skin.’

David raised his eyebrows.

‘Oh. I see.’

‘It explains a lot of poltergeist lore. Poltergeists are associated with teenagers going through puberty or people going through the menopause. They’re associated with people undergoing chemical hormonal changes. Nutty people. People with sexual problems.’ He squinted at David. ‘You got any sexual problems?’

‘Not apart from being a sex addict.’

‘Same here.’

They clinked glasses again and Ben continued: ‘See, on the tour there are different people each night and some are more likely to produce pheromones, or succumb to them for that matter, than others. That’s why there isn’t an attack every night – the circumstances have to be right.’ He pointed to himself with satisfaction. ‘I’m a bit of a trigger. You’re even stronger.’

David was nodding enthusiastically. ‘So . . . when I go to Canada, things might start happening on your tours again.’

David was leaving Edinburgh in a few days’ time and flying out to North America for his brother’s wedding. He had decided this was a golden opportunity to stay and do nothing there for several weeks, and liked to remind everyone of that fact.

‘Maybe.’ Ben chose not to rise to the bait. ‘It does all fit, though. Poltergeists are supposed to scare people, but they don’t hurt them. Alarm pheromones are designed to do the same – just create a state of alarm.’

David’s glass halted halfway to his lips. ‘But the Mackenzie Poltergeist does hurt people.’

‘Well, this is an extreme case.’

David thought some more. He turned and peered through a slat in the blind, even though there was nothing to see. ‘You not noticed the way people collapse in the tomb?’

‘Reluctantly?’ But Ben knew exactly what David meant.

A high proportion of the visitors who collapsed in the Black Mausoleum didn’t just fall down on the spot. They felt sick, or cold and overwhelmed, with a desire to get out of the vault and it was as they made for the tomb door that they went down. Anyone who collapsed where they had been standing usually had a barrier of people preventing them reaching the exit. Regardless of whether or not they made it to the door, all the victims had one thing in common; they were standing slightly apart from the rest of the group when they were ‘attacked’.

‘It’s like this thing picks off people who stray too far away from the rest.’ David finished his wine. ‘Or separates them from the herd.’

‘I hope you don’t refer to visitors as “the herd” when you take them on tours.’

‘Do you really believe it’s just imagination?’

‘More than I believe there’s a devil in my back yard giving the new employee a hard time.’

‘I suppose.’ David stood up to go. Ben rose with him and patted his shoulder.

‘So. You’ll still be on the tours once you come back from Canada?’

David shook his hand.

‘Aye, I suppose I will.’

‘Good man. And David . . .’

‘Yes?’ David turned.

‘Don’t take the poltergeist with you on the plane. The pilot sits on his own.’





Claire


Statement given by Claire Valentine on 1 February 2001:

I moved into the flat on 7 January 2000, having read a little of the history of my building and found it fascinating; if you live in old Edinburgh you live hand in hand with the past, and it turned out that my building had been a poorhouse situated between the graveyard and the Bedlam Asylum! The only thing I found vaguely creepy about my new location was the Edinburgh University Artificial Intelligence building next door. Some of those students were genuinely disturbing.

The flat was light and airy, but quite small. Although built in 1752 it had been converted recently into modern apartments and was not the least dated inside. I did not know much about Jack, the former owner, only that he loved the flat and the area, and was extremely sad to be moving. Why go then?

It did not take long to settle into my new flat. It was my home, all mine (and the building society’s, of course), and I finally had control of my own environment. There was no one else to take into consideration – no one to tidy up after, or moan about the mess I made. I didn’t have to cook for anyone else – I didn’t have to cook at all. I felt peaceful and secure. When I closed my door at night there was only me, and I loved it.

Maybe I should have taken more note of the things going on around me. Ronald, the ‘quiet’ guy from downstairs, was admitted into the locked ward of a psychiatric unit not long after I arrived.

One night, just after I moved in, a friend and I were sitting in the living-room chatting when the candles suddenly blew out. All 24 of them. Simultaneously. There were no open windows. No draught.

The next morning whilst getting ready for work, I searched desperately for the second of a pair of shoes, to no avail. Worried I would miss my bus I tossed the single one back into the cupboard, slammed the door and stuck my trainers on instead (very professional with a black suit). On my return that evening, I was pleasantly surprised to find the pair of shoes laid out for me by the bed. I thought it slightly odd, but the fact that I knew where they were was more important to me than how they got there. After all, my stereo hadn’t vanished, so why worry?

Then, one July night, something happened that really disturbed my sense of safety and security. Lying in bed reading at the end of a hot, dry day, I heard the sound of hammering rain. Thinking this was strange, I pulled my blind up to take a peek. There were flames licking the windowsill – my windowsill! After dressing (almost) I ran from the flat, bolting out of the main door to be confronted by the deafening roar of the enormous blaze lunging from the archway under my flat.

It took three fire engines to extinguish the fire and rescue the two sheepdogs that lived downstairs (after being wrapped in blankets and given a whiff of oxygen, they didn’t seem the least perturbed by their experience). The police were never able to establish the cause of the fire, only its point of origin. The garden of the flat under mine shared a wall with Greyfriars cemetery and the fire started in a pile of rubbish stacked there.

The fire seemed to kick-start a chain of strange occurrences not only in my own flat but in the flat of the couple next door. I would leave a glass on the floor at night and it would be in the kitchen when I got up in the morning. Arriving home from work I would find the right-hand door of my bathroom cabinet open – always the right-hand door – and my toothbrush gone. I might be a bit of a slob at times, but I do have a thing about shutting all the doors in the house, including cupboards, and the cabinet door can’t swing open itself.

Small things, I know, but then in bed with my partner one night I realised I could hear a third person breathe! Now that was disturbing. Though my partner was asleep, someone seemed to be blowing raspberries in my ear. Next time the noise had moved to the bottom of the bedroom wall, near the door, and my partner swore it was not a raspberry but the sound of giggling.

A bedside light started buzzing and continued to do so after I had disconnected it from its power source. I came home one evening, let myself into the flat and heard what sounded like a hundred chattering voices that cut off abruptly with the slamming of the door. A month after British summertime had ended I was delighted to discover that the clock on the VCR had righted itself, though I had had no clue how to do it. Three separate watches stopped at ten to two. Doors opened and slammed shut independently. What was going on?

One Saturday afternoon I bumped into a neighbour who owned the flat with the garden (and the dogs). He invited me into the flat he shared with his partner for a cup of tea and we got chatting. Much to my surprise, Wilson and Angela had their own mysterious goings-on going on! Their ‘supernatural’ occurrences were similar to mine, but with a more sinister undertone; crockery moved, glasses smashed, lights went on and off.

I was beginning to feel genuinely spooked. Was I just kidding myself about having control of my surrounding environment? Was I as alone in my home as I would like to believe? I had never felt anything sinister in my flat. I had never even believed in the existence of anything sinister to feel. Up to this point I had viewed the goings on in my home with bemusement rather than fear or concern. Now, however, I knew it was happening to my neighbours as well as me. The same thing was happening to other people. And worse.

I have never believed in the supernatural and the idea of ghosts and ghoulies has always seemed slightly ridiculous to me. However, I have no explanation for what has gone on in my home and as I write this I notice that my watch has started working again. I started writing at ten to two.

How weird is that?





Small Wonders


Things going bump in the night have prompted a ghost tour company to offer danger money to its guides in case they are attacked by a poltergeist.

‘STRONG SPIRIT TAKES ITS TOLL’, SCOTSMAN, 24 JULY 2000



It was the first of August. The air in the cemetery was thick and balmy, almost oppressive, a sign that a summer storm was on the way. Ben Scott had twenty people squashed in the back of the Black Mausoleum, but none of them were particularly afraid – the mood was more one of nervous joviality. David might have been plagued with sightings recently, but nothing ghostly had happened on Ben’s tour in two months so he had decided that comedy was the way to go. His stories were now liberally spiced with jokes and anecdotes and, even in the Black Mausoleum, he kept up a stream of wisecracks and irreverent comments.

On either side of him stood a young boy and a girl, both about seven years old. Younger children were not common on the tours but when they did appear, Ben liked to keep them by his side. The Black Mausoleum could be terrifying enough for grown-ups – a child stuck in a dark knot of adults twice its height could get scared out of its wits. Next to the tour leader, kids tended to feel a bit more secure, and the guide could keep an eye on them in case anything happened.

Ben had decided to try to impress the crowd with his pheromone theory. It had taken him a long time to come up with it and he was damn well going to let people know about it. He stood near the tomb doorway, the lambent glow of the moon silhouetting both himself and the seven-year-olds. His full-length leather coat was polished by moonlight, the edges melding into the blackness of the tomb. He rested a leather-gloved hand on the shoulders of the children who flanked him, looking more like a demon about to unleash its minions than a man launching into a scientific explanation of the unknown. ‘Ladies and gentlemen, think of this,’ he began ‘Ants. Ants. With legs. And feet . . .’

Ben launched into his cherished pheromones theory as if he were born to be a chemistry teacher, blissfully unaware of the crowd’s eyes gradually glazing over. As he spoke, however, the two children slowly turned their heads and stared at the left-hand wall. Ben faltered and looked in the same direction, losing his concentration. He glanced down at the children, who were now staring up at him with frightened eyes. They seemed about to speak, but Ben shook his head at them and gave each of their shoulders a squeeze.

‘Is everything all right?’ A concerned voice drifted from the back of the vault; the children’s mother. Ben looked at the crowd. Nobody appeared afraid, just worried he would start up on another chemistry lecture. ‘As I was saying,’ Ben continued, pulling himself together. ‘Imagine it’s the ’70s and you are all going out clubbing . . .’

Ben Scott said goodbye to his tour at the cemetery gate. As they moved out into the street, the mother came up to him, offspring in tow. ‘Thank you for paying so much attention to the children,’ she said. ‘I didn’t realise this place would be so scary.’

Ben waved a gloved hand. ‘Aw, they weren’t scared.’ He winked at the little boy. ‘Were you?’

They boy hid behind his mother.

‘Oh, they were,’ she smiled nervously. ‘They said they heard something laughing at the bottom of the wall.’

‘Hah. That’s kids. Kids are like that.’ Ben, who had never considered having children, sounded supremely confident. ‘And you can see how easy it is to let your imagination run away in that place.’

‘I know!’ The mother gasped. ‘I told them that they were just imagining it.’ She bent over the children and indicated Ben. ‘See. The man says there’s nothing in there to be afraid of. I told you there was nothing there; it’s just some silly stories.’

She looked at Ben expectantly. Ben got it.

‘Come here, you two.’ He shepherded the children away from their mother and led them to a little patch of light under the cemetery gate lamp. He knelt down, his face now level with theirs. ‘You don’t have to be scared. Your mum’s right. It’s just some silly stories.’

He smiled disarmingly. The little girl stared at him with grim concentration.

‘You didn’t hear the laughing? In the wall?’ she asked earnestly.

He looked into the girl’s wide, waiting eyes. He turned and looked at the boy. The boy now seemed neither afraid nor unafraid. The girl stared at him, unblinking.

‘Yeah,’ Ben nodded. ‘I heard it.’

The girl touched the sleeve of his coat, as if comforting him. ‘What was it?’

He put a gloved hand on each of their shoulders once more. ‘In the trade we call it . . . just-one-of-those-things.’

‘What things?’

‘I don’t know, kid. But that was just one of them.’

The girl finally smiled and lowered her hand from Ben’s arm. Ben pushed himself to his feet, pretending to lean heavily on the siblings as he did so. The children giggled. He handed them back to their mother, who thanked him again and said goodbye. Alone in the graveyard, Ben stood for a while looking up at the oily sky.

Two days later Ben Scott got a phone call from Kate.

‘Guess what happened on my tour last night?’ she said excitedly.

‘Someone collapsed.’

‘Deirdre Quirk from Ireland. She got cold and sick at the back of the vault. Said she had to get out. I said off you go. Off she went. Bang! Collapsed in the doorway.’

‘Good for you.’

‘It’s been ages, love! Two months. I though old Mackenzie was in the huff with me.’

Ben smiled though Kate couldn’t see it.

‘No. He just has a strange sense of humour.’

‘Eh? Oh well. Just thought I’d call. See you later.’

Kate hung up. Ben went to the window and sat for a while looking into the graveyard. The storm hadn’t arrived and the sky was now azure blue.

That night Ben had a dream. In the dream he could hear his body decomposing. He could feel acid trickling down his stomach walls and his muscles relaxing like old elastic bands. He lay in his bed, unable to move. It seemed he had been unable to move for years, somehow paralysed by loneliness and fear. Mould spread up and grew under his armpits, splitting the crusty, unexercised skin and flourishing in the folds of the fat that had built in layers on his exhausted frame. Gripping hard, he squeezed oily white worms through the flesh on his arms, not sure if they were hairs or pus, or if they had eaten into him from below. He knew he was alive because he could feel his heart beating inside his chest, but as he listened the beat changed to the tick of a huge clock on the wall above him. The noise was sinister, setting his teeth on edge, and the more he tried to tune it out, the louder it seemed to get.

In the dream he opened his eyes in time to see the clock fall. The rim hit him on the flat of his forehead and the clock toppled over, its face on his face, the glass smashed, the hands pressing into his flesh. And the hands kept turning, pulling his skin further out of shape with every tick, tick, tick.

Wilson Chapel woke in the middle of the night, not quite sure what had roused him from his sound sleep. He could hear Angela breathing softly and regularly beside him. His throat was dry. He gently levered himself out of bed, put on a bathrobe and walked through the house to get a glass of water.

The kitchen was dark, though the taps glistened in the light of the moon and its image was reflected in clean plates on the draining board near the sill. Outside, the dark stonework of the graveyard wall cut across the starry sky and the silhouette of Mackenzie’s vault leered over the top like a giant bald head.

Wilson couldn’t see his shed for dark shadows. Not that he used it much – he had never got over the irrational unease he felt whenever he stepped inside, as if he had somehow walked through to the tomb behind by mistake. Angela disliked that corner of the garden as well. She swore that once, while she had been sitting watching the tomb, her cup had flown off the arm of the bench without anyone touching it. Wilson felt she must have been mistaken.

He switched on the kitchen light and, as the fluorescent strip sputtered to life, the world outside shuddered out of existence. Three upturned glasses sat on the draining board in front of the now dark windows. Wilson padded over, picked one up and filled it with water from the tap, trying to peer vainly past the glowing sheen the fluorescent light had laid over the black glass. He gave up and walked back to the kitchen table, sipping his water. Looking for something to read, he settled for the back of a packet of muesli and sat down to work out what nimbo-polypropolene 4 was doing in a health cereal.

There was a sound behind him, brittle as the grinding of teeth, then a spattering tinkle, like tears falling. Wilson froze. Putting down the muesli packet he slowly turned towards the window, the place the sound had come from. Everything seemed normal. Wilson got up and walked over to the sink. Perhaps he had not turned the tap off properly and there had been a sudden spurt of water from the pipes.

‘Ow! What the . . . ?’ He jumped back and looked down. There were shards of glass scattered across the floor. On the draining board was the jagged bottom of one of the glasses, a grinning mouth filled with transparent teeth. It had not fallen over and smashed, because the decapitated lower half was still upright. It looked as if had been crushed where it stood.

The third glass was nowhere to be seen. Wilson searched for it, carefully moving round the splinters that littered the floor. It seemed to have vanished. He fetched a dustpan and cleaned up the mess. Eventually he switched off the kitchen light and Mackenzie’s tomb sprang up over the garden wall again. Wilson got into bed carefully, so as not to wake Angela and lay trying to work out, over and over, some logical explanation for what had just happened. It was a long time before he gave up and finally drifted off to sleep. In the morning he got up early, while Angela was still asleep, and went though to the kitchen.

The missing glass was back on the draining board.





Cara


Written statement by Cara Saville about an incident which took place in Greyfriars on 8 January 2001:

My name is Cara Saville. I am 23 years old, I grew up in Warwickshire and I started working as a tour guide for City of the Dead tours in September 2000. Previously I lived in Austria and Slovakia.

In winter all the nights are very dark around here. Cloudy, icy, wet . . . it all blends into one when you are peering through the weather into a black graveyard.

Greyfriars. The name means something more to me than it does to the hordes of visitors who pass through this city looking for the statue of Bobby to photograph. The name, I realise now, is dripping with legend, myth, fantasy, call it what you like; some is fact and some is the power of imagination.

The power of imagination. Even those who have little imagination surprise themselves when they walk into that infamous cemetery late at night. I go there all the time and I’ve seen the calmest, coolest person, the most rock-steady atheist, turn into a shivering mass of anorak and woolly hat once we get inside the Covenanters’ Prison. A recent example occurred on 8 January 2001. It was cold, had been raining heavily for two days and was very wet underfoot. My party were attempting to pick their way as delicately as they could through the mud of the graveyard. I wasn’t. I like stomping along in my heavy steel toe-capped boots (the only time I ever get to wear them) and splashing grime onto the bottom of my long leather coat. A graveyard guide looks more authentic when her coat is splattered with cemetery goo.

A group of Americans struggled after me. They were having a good time but they were also having difficulty navigating the uneven terrain whilst trying to keep the mud off their impeccable, matching designer outfits. Someone at the back was trying to add to the atmosphere by making ‘ghostly’ noises, but that really isn’t necessary in Greyfriars. The only reaction he got was from a Swiss gentleman who offered him a throat lozenge.

We reached the area known as the rogues’ gallery, beside the grave of Captain John Porteous, the last stop before the Covenanters’ Prison. I leapt onto one of the flat tombstones, disrespectful I know, but it looks good, and turned to face the party. The wind was picking up, causing the branches above us to creak and rustle eerily. Great. Nice and atmospheric. This area of the graveyard is always darker than the rest of Greyfriars as it is hemmed in by trees on one side and the high, ancient Flodden wall on the other – a perfect place to balance on a grave and tell stories of Edinburgh’s horrible past.

I told some stories and made some jokes (people laugh very easily when they are nervous). The time had come for the warning. Did anybody know what an inductor was? People shuffled around and glanced at each other: ‘Ehm . . . someone who leads an orchestra?’

I explained that an inductor was the kind of person who might attract a poltergeist, but that I wasn’t worried because I already knew I wasn’t one. Warning over. Right. Let’s go. I shrugged off those who were clinging to my sleeves and we were on our way to the Covenanters’ Prison. Chains jangled, the gates swung open and I smiled encouragingly at the white faces in my group. ‘In you go.’

In they went. There was silence apart from the squelching of feet in mud and, now that they were finally inside the prison and nobody looked like they were going to fall over unless they hit a really muddy patch, the tour party relaxed.

Before continuing to the Black Mausoleum I explained a little about the various activities that had taken place here. I told them about the Covenanters, the collapses and the cold spots.

A short blonde girl looked particularly nervous. ‘It’s freezing in here.’ I explained that this was winter in Scotland and nothing paranormal. If she hit a cold spot she would definitely know. No matter how cold she was she would suddenly become even colder, and probably feel sick as well. All the same, the tour stamped their feet and rubbed their hands as we walked towards the Black Mausoleum. I got the rest of the questions out of the way. Was anyone claustrophobic? Anybody suffer from heart problems? Was anyone pregnant? The Swiss gentleman assured us he wasn’t pregnant.

The tour party went into the tomb and I got them standing at the back. It did seem abnormally cold – far worse than it had been seconds before. I had not got far into my routine when there was a sudden shuffling at the back of the group. Someone called my name, there was a gasp of horror from the rear of the crowd and they parted. One of the Americans, a gentleman called Mike, who was wearing what had formerly been pristine white jeans, was lying unconscious in the mud.

‘Is he joking? He must be messing around,’ Mike’s friends were whispering to each other.

But Mike wasn’t messing about and his other friends were reluctant to get dirty by crouching down in the mud beside him, so I knelt to check he was all right – mud just wipes off leather trousers. He was out cold.

Mike didn’t stay unconscious for long. As soon as we got him outside his eyelids fluttered, and his friends helped him to his feet. He was very white (far whiter than his jeans now were) and he was shaking. I asked his girlfriend to take him out of the Covenanters’ Prison and some of his friends went too, especially when I told them they could wait for us in the pub.

Mike was all right and the rest of the tour party were anxious to talk about their experience. As has happened so often, there was far more going on in the Black Mausoleum than I realised at the time. Some of them talked about feeling pins and needles in their upper body and of the sensation being strongest just as Mike collapsed. One, Shawn Pilgren, felt ‘sick and cold’ just before Mike’s blackout. A girl called Ariel Schudson felt ‘very dizzy, weak-kneed and cold from the inside’. A man called Todd Kunkel felt ‘cold in waves, with pins and needles in hands and face’.

Mike himself didn’t say much, except to assure us that he hadn’t been particularly scared before he collapsed and that nothing like that had happened to him before. He still looked very pale. I found out that he was an executive in some large American firm and that neither he nor his friends had ever had an interest in the paranormal. Needless to say, they had suddenly developed one and asked me all sorts of questions. I was able to answer most of them. Since I took this job I have become quite an expert myself.

This doesn’t mean to say that I believe in the Mackenzie Poltergeist. Ben, Kate and David are my friends and when we sit in the pub and they talk about the things that happened before I became a guide, I admit it does astonish me. I feel the same when I see the collapses and scratches myself, though certain guides seem to experience far more than others. I have decided to blame these (alarmingly frequent) incidents on people’s imaginations, even if imagination can’t exactly explain the occurrences. If I allowed myself to believe there was something lurking in the Black Mausoleum I wouldn’t have any fun on the tours. I’m just not as brave as the character I portray; I shut my eyes during Freddy Krueger films and I’ve never seen Silence of the Lambs or The Exorcist.

So why do I love to take people into the Black Mausoleum and scare them? Maybe I do believe, deep down, that there is some ‘other’ kind of energy at the back of that graveyard and I am experiencing something, first-hand, which other people only talk about. If that’s true, no amount of fear will make me give up. Or maybe I enjoy being paid to indulge my darker side. Perhaps I long to have something happen to me, just to prove once and for all that the supernatural exists.

Then again, maybe not. I can’t help thinking about something that happened to me right after Christmas 2000. I was sitting alone in my flat and suddenly noticed that my clock had completely changed its time. Now, I know there is absolutely nothing scary about that, but as I looked at the dial, which I hadn’t touched, I felt an overwhelming fear combined with the absolute conviction that the Mackenzie Poltergeist had done it. It was just an insignificant little unexplained thing – nothing I could prove to be ghostly, but I was utterly convinced that it was Mackenzie’s way of showing me he knew where I lived. What I felt at that moment is something I don’t wish to think about, never mind write about. That’s how visitors to the Covenanters’ Prison feel, not me.

Let’s just say I still do the job because I like to scare tourists.

Yes. That’s probably it.





The Birds


Now a city ghost tour company has come under attack itself – from a Christian group which claims it is meddling with the devil . . . the Evangelical Alliance in Scotland has now written to the Church of Scotland asking them to put a stop to it because it is calling up the devil and the occult.

‘Meddling with the devil is a grave mistake’

EDINBURGH EVENING NEWS, 31 OCTOBER 2001.

A spokeswoman for the Los Angeles-based Fox Family Channel, which has 79 million viewers, said, ‘We have chosen the Covenanters’ Prison in Greyfriars Kirkyard as one of the scariest places on earth because we are intrigued by the Mackenzie Poltergeist.’ It will now feature in a 15-part series to be broadcast from March. Fox decided to devote two programmes to the kirkyard because it was thought to be the most hair-raising place they found.

‘Is this the scariest place on the planet?’

EDINBURGH EVENING NEWS, 25 JANUARY 2001



There comes a time when a joke, if repeated often enough, isn’t funny any more. Or, imagine a set of scales, with one side heavier than the other. Begin to add weights to the lighter side, a tiny bit at a time. Each weight seems to make no difference. Like a plant growing, or a disease spreading, the measurement is so minute that you cannot see what is developing until you finally realise that the plant has bloomed or disease has killed it. One tiny weight, when added to many others, is all it takes to tip a scale from lightness into something much darker. It was a little brown bird, so small it weighed no more a few spoonfuls of sand, that tipped the scales for Ben Scott.

It was December 2000, the dead of winter, and a group of happy guides were gathered round a table in Greyfriars Bobby pub enjoying Christmas cheer. The interior of the bar was merry and bright, with Christmas lights twinkling under the giant sports screen.

There were now two more guides at City of the Dead tours. Kate and Ben had taken their time and picked the new members carefully; it took a certain type of person to do the job properly. The history, anyone could learn. Likewise voice projection. The real requirement to be a really good guide was an innate ability to entertain – that, and to be completely full of oneself. Despite a clash of egos that could be heard all over town, the guides got on like a house on fire and often went out drinking together; partly for the fun of it, partly to find out if anything new had happened on the tours.

And, it seemed, something always had.

On 7 August 2000, three terrified women had run from the Black Mausoleum after feeling suddenly cold and yelling to Kate that something strange was in the tomb with them. Seconds later another woman, who had been directly behind, insisted there was now something she couldn’t see moving in the darkness beside her. Understandably, she also left. Five days later an American girl named Jennifer Walsh fell to the ground as Ben Scott swung open the gates of the Covenanters’ Prison. Fifteen minutes later, she was still unable to stand. On 24 August an American nurse named Stacy took Ben Scott aside after the tour. Ben could tell by the way the moonlight shone on her face that she had been crying. She said that while standing in the tomb she had felt ‘something beside her’. Just as she had convinced herself that this was her imagination, it laid a hand on her arm. She was too afraid to move and spent the rest of her time in the Black Mausoleum standing absolutely still, hoping not to antagonise it.

On 16 September, Leanne Callus from Edinburgh collapsed in the Black Mausoleum and had to be carried out. Four days later Elaine Holmes from Cumbernauld experienced ‘something tight’ against her chest, making it hard for her to breathe, and her head began to ache. As soon as she left the Black Mausoleum the sensations vanished. Less than a week after that, Radhika Hersey from California sensed ‘some kind of presence’ in front of her as she was about to enter the tomb and suddenly became ‘freezing cold’. She decided to exit the graveyard there and then.

The eighth of October produced a student who woke up with a swollen face and eye the day after the tour. On 21 October, George Wash panicked when something clawed at his leg in the tomb. The tour party he was on also saw small floating lights above the door. Ten days later John Frank began moving around in the tomb, much to the annoyance of those pressed against him. He claimed that every time he stood still he felt a ‘cold spot’ move over him. Trying to work his way to the doorway of the vault, he ended up holding onto the tomb wall to keep from collapsing.

Apart from an attack on an electrician called Roy Hutchison, November was a quiet month, but in December it was business as usual. On the ninth Debbie King from London felt her legs freeze and when she reached down, the air was at a much lower temperature than the rest of the vault. She woke up the next day with scratches resembling claw marks on the backs of her hands. On 17 December Anne-Jeannette Wilson from Edinburgh felt her arm begin to go ‘cold and numb’ and ran from the vault. At the same time something ripped a hole in the brand-new, long leather coat worn by Paul Langton of Portsmouth. The guides were particularly worried about this new development – cuts, bruises and collapses were fine, but they now sported full-length leather coats themselves as part of the tour uniform.

Ben Scott stood at the bar trying vainly to remember what his guides had ordered. The rest sat at a large round table near the end of the room, lost in a haze of cigarette smoke and singing ‘Bat Out of Hell’ along with the jukebox. At one end of the table, rolling a cigarette, was Kate. Like Ben, she had remained a tour guide as well as running things. Pint of lager for her. Next to Kate sat Andrew Flowerdew, helping himself to her tobacco. Andrew was six foot two, weighed twenty-one stone and leaned threateningly towards people when he talked. With his broken nose and mop of blonde hair, he looked like he might have been an ex-heavyweight boxer, but when he spoke, his voice was gentle and humour gleamed in his eyes. During the day he held a variety of odd jobs, including gardener, antiques dealer and alcohol counsellor. Bottle of Beck’s for him. Next to Andrew sat David Pollock, deep in conversation with Duncan Laird. Tall and thin with sad brown eyes, Duncan wasn’t a tour guide himself, but did just about everything else in the company. Pint of lager for both of them. On the other side of the table was Cara Saville, the last member of the company. She was tall and slim with a stunning face, a cascade of auburn hair and a mind full of questions. Cara came from Warwickshire but had studied in Austria and Slovakia, and was now an odd mixture of English rose and Eastern European elegance. She was drinking something Ben couldn’t pronounce, but which came in a white bottle.

Ben was the oldest of the group. Short and broad shouldered, with cropped brown hair, he was still dressed in black despite the festive occasion, acting on the theory that it was harder to look bad in dark colours. David joined him at the bar and together they loaded the table with a fresh round of drinks.

The conversation between the guides was wide ranging. Andrew was telling Kate about an American naval military exercise during the Second World War that had gone wrong and sank several British submarines. Kate was trying to decide whether to believe him. David and Duncan were discussing the hilarity of a TV advertisement featuring a drop-kicking bear. Since Duncan had graduated in film and David was an amateur moviemaker, they felt they could appreciate this on all levels, especially after a few pints of lager. Cara was playing with her hair and staring out of the window.

But, no matter where the conversation started, whenever the City of the Dead tour guides got together, it eventually turned to the events in the graveyard next door. It was Ben who started it this time.

‘I saw the strangest thing in the cemetery on Saturday.’

‘That was probably Kate.’

‘Seriously. I saw something really weird. A really weird bird.’

‘That would be Cara, then.’

‘I went into the graveyard, right. This was during the day. It was lovely. I was going up the Black Mausoleum to see if it was locked.’

‘Yeah. Someone keeps leaving it open.’ Kate managed to glare at everyone round the table at the same time.

‘Isn’t me.’

‘Me neither!’

‘I always close it.’

‘Me too.’

‘No you don’t.’

‘Well, I usually close it.’

‘Well, how come it’s always open?’

‘Anyway, as I was saying, I was walking up the Covenanters’ Prison and this bird flew down and landed in the doorway of the Black Mausoleum.’

‘So, birds are leaving the gate open?’

‘Yes, that’ll be it. Now can I finish my story?’

The guides nodded. Despite their joviality, they were always intrigued by any new tale about the Covenanters’ Prison.

‘It was just sitting there, looking inside. Like it could see something. So I walked up to it. Of course, I expected it to fly away, but it didn’t. I got right up to it. Like . . . a couple of feet away. Nothing. Didn’t move. I looked into the tomb, but there was nothing there. The bird was still staring inside.’ Ben lit a cigarette. He was moving into full storytelling mode. ‘So I knelt down beside it, right next to it, and I reached out and just . . . touched it! It sort of hopped to the side, but it wouldn’t stop staring into the tomb. I poked it again and it just moved a little bit to the side, as if I was annoying it.’

‘Was it wild?’

‘Well, it didn’t look too pleased!’

The mass groan was heard at the other end of the bar.

‘No, really,’ Ben spread his hands in a gesture of puzzlement. ‘It was like it was transfixed – as if something in the tomb had hypnotised it.’

‘What did you do?’

‘Well, I suddenly realised I was kneeling in the entrance to the Black Mausoleum with a bird which seemed to be frozen by something inside that I wasn’t able to see. I decided that maybe I should get the hell out. Just in case.’

‘Maybe the bird was hurt or something. Was it very young?’

‘I didn’t ask. Thing was, when I was locking the Covenanters’ Prison gate, I looked back up to where it had been sitting. It was still there but suddenly it flew off, away from the doorway, like something had startled it, or moved towards it.’

‘I bet you didn’t close the tomb’s gate either.’ Kate rolled another cigarette.

‘You’re damn right I didn’t!’ Ben looked peeved. ‘But it got me thinking; you never see any birds in the Covenanters’ Prison.’

‘That’s ’cause it’s pitch black when we take the tours in.’

‘You never see them during the day either.’

‘I saw one,’ David interrupted. ‘A couple of weeks ago. But it was dead.’

‘So did I.’ Andrew leaned over the table. ‘Halfway up the Covenanters’ Prison. A while ago. Lying dead on the ground.’

‘A good place for dead things to lie.’

‘There’s probably a cat in there.’

‘You never see any animals in there.’

The tour guides mulled over this for a second, but not much longer. After all, it was the Christmas staff night out. It was a night for celebration.

‘I tell you what,’ David took a sip of his pint, ‘and this is going to sound weird.’

‘Anything you say usually does.’

David ignored the comment.

‘When I was driving over to do the tour last week, I suddenly felt there was someone in the back seat of my car. It sounds stupid, I know, but I looked in my rear-view mirror, I was so sure. And I thought I saw something there – like a shadow.’

‘Maybe you did see a shadow.’

‘Yeah.’ But he shook his head. ‘I don’t know. It was odd. I was sure there was something. Not a shadow. I don’t know what I saw.’

‘I guess it’s my round.’ Duncan stood up, looming over the rest of the party. ‘Maybe you should just have a coke, David.’

The moment was broken. For a second the scales tipped back. Gradually the conversation turned back to the trivia of everyday life.

The next night Cara, at the head of her tour party, found a small brown bird at the entrance to the Black Mausoleum. It was dead.

The gate to the tomb was wide open.





Karyn


Statement by Karyn Perrin from Melbourne, who encountered the Mackenzie Poltergeist on 25 March 2001:

I’m from Melbourne and have been in the UK since October. I am working permanently in London as a personal assistant for a top executive. I try to get away at weekends to see different places. In March 2001 I had four days’ holiday and decided to go to Edinburgh. I stumbled across the tour accidentally.

We had been standing in the vault for a few minutes when I went to move a stray hair away from my face. I did the same thing again five seconds later when, once more, I felt something brushing my forehead. I thought ‘hang on a minute’, then ‘don’t be silly, it’s just my hair’. Straight after, however, I felt a strange warmth shoot right through my body. I thought this was odd, because the guide had warned us against cold spots, not hot spots! Before I could say anything, I suddenly felt very strange and knew I was going to pass out. I nudged my friend to get out of the way so I could get outside, but he thought I was joking as we had been laughing and having fun all through the tour, so he ignored me. I pushed the girl in front of me out of the way and started staggering towards the door. The tour guide caught me just before I collapsed and helped me outside. I instantly felt better. I didn’t even have to sit down, the feeling just disappeared.

The tour was at its end so we headed straight for the pub where I eventually stopped shaking and my knees stopped wobbling. The next morning I woke up and felt my back stinging. I discovered two long scratches down the middle of my back, which were raised like a welt. They were burning and stinging like crazy. I had my friend take a photograph of them.

Later that day we climbed up Arthur’s Seat [a green hilly area in central Edinburgh] and I suddenly realised that although the stinging had gone from my back, the same sensation was now on my shin. When my friend looked at my back the scratches had disappeared, but I had a large patch like a burn on my leg. It is still there, but fading gradually.





Winter of Discontent


I was wearing a thick overcoat that, until then, had kept out the cold. But suddenly there was a chill on my neck. I looked behind me into the darkness but saw nothing except my breath crystallising from my nose and mouth. I stepped two yards onto the path, but my now laboured breathing was no longer visible. We immediately decided we had taken enough photographs and walked quickly to the gate.

No one looked behind them as the padlock was snapped back into place.

‘Scotland’s scariest place’

DAILY RECORD, 24 FEBRUARY 2001



February the second 2001 was the first anniversary of the death of the Reverend Colin Grant. On that day, his son, Colin Grant Junior – also a spiritualist minister – went into Greyfriars cemetery to perform another exorcism. He did so despite the misgivings of his family, who remembered the ominous statement uttered by Grant senior after he had performed the last one. But Colin Grant junior felt it was his duty to finish what his father had started.

Colin admitted he sensed a ‘strong spiritual presence’ in the graveyard and that the feeling changed when he reached the gates of the Covenanters’ Prison. Though he disliked using the word ‘evil’, Grant felt that what was inside the prison was ‘darker’ and ‘more powerful’ than the presences he had encountered when instigating other spiritual matters. In fact, he had tried to go in once before only to turn back when the prison was opened. He said he had sensed a violent energy that began about six feet beyond the gates. On the anniversary of his father’s death, however, Colin proceeded, going through the same ritual as his father in an attempt to lay whatever was in there to rest.

If more sprits were freed, it seemed to make no difference to the Mackenzie Poltergeist. On 9 February a visitor from Holland suddenly found he could not breathe in the Black Mausoleum. He took a few steps towards the exit and collapsed. Waking up as soon as he was taken outside, he got shakily to his feet and angrily shook off those helping him. Swaying slightly and trying to maintain what dignity he could, he strode unsteadily out of the Covenanters’ Prison. His girlfriend told Ben Scott that the gentleman’s name was Anders van der Lei. He was, she added, a man who was always perfectly in control of himself – she had never seen him act this way in her life. She smiled at Ben before she ran after him, and appeared rather pleased by the whole thing. On 4 March, Sophie Waters from Sheffield began to lose consciousness in the Black Mausoleum. She claimed that she felt something round her head that prevented her breathing properly. She was helped out of the Black Mausoleum just in time to prevent her collapsing completely. As soon as she set foot outside the tomb she recovered. On 25 March, exactly the same thing happened to Karyn Perrin from Melbourne. Three days later, Amanda Colley woke up the morning after a tour with bruises all over her body. A week later it was the turn of Monique Jarre from France, then Adrianne Watson from the south of England.

David stood at the gate of the Black Mausoleum with a tour party of around 25, most of whom seemed to be Australian. It was late March and the wind was dancing through the bare, winter-ravaged trees, whipping the near invisible branches into a frenzy; the tour party could hear them hissing overhead like a nest of angry snakes waiting to strike.

David delivered the company disclaimer and, after checking that nobody was pregnant, claustrophobic or suffering from a heart condition, he asked if anyone present had experienced poltergeist activity before. The crowd looked at each other and shook their heads. Then a female voice piped up from the back of the group: ‘Actually, I had an experience with a poltergeist when I was a kid.’

‘Okaaaaaay.’ David stepped back as he ushered the rest of the tour through the gates. ‘If you’d rather not go in.’

‘No! I do want to go in. I guess I thought I’d better just warn you.’ The woman elbowed herself into the middle of the crowd – she was brave, but not stupid. ‘I am kinda nervous, though,’ she added, rather unnecessarily.

As the group moved past into the tomb, David took the woman by the arm. She was trembling. ‘If you’re nervous, stay by me,’ he said sympathetically. ‘What’s your name?’

‘Alice.’ She looked up at him and smiled wanly.

Though winter was reluctantly giving way to spring, the tomb was still as dark as a bad thought and the faces of the crowd were white blobs splattered on the musty background of the Black Mausoleum. On impulse, David put his arm around the woman by his side and kept it there as he talked. Suddenly, Alice’s head jerked back and her knees buckled. David held her up. She looked at him and bit her lip. David glanced behind him. There was no one there. ‘You OK?’ he asked.

She did not reply, but gestured for him to continue.

David was proud of his storytelling ability and wasn’t about to let an unexpected happening interrupt a good story. He began again, but no more than 30 seconds into his spiel, Alice jerked forward again. This time David felt her body vibrate, just below his arm. Something had punched her in the back.

He stopped the tour and walked the terrified woman outside. Taking her by the shoulders he could feel her body shaking even more than the furious branches above.

‘What’s going on?’ he demanded.

‘Something was hitting me in the back,’ Alice’s breath came in sharp gasps and milky puffs floated between them. ‘I know it wasn’t you, because I could feel your arm. It only stopped when we came outside.’ She took a deep breath and managed to compose herself. ‘I’m, uh, just going to wait out here until we’re finished. If you don’t mind.’

David most certainly didn’t mind. Leaving the woman in the dark, windy passage of the Covenanters’ Prison, he re-entered the tomb. The other visitors were still wedged at the back of the Black Mausoleum, their eyes bulging so wide the tomb seemed filled with owls.

The stories that night were much shorter than normal and nobody seemed to mind, yet after David said goodbye to the rest of the tour party he was approached by two Australians and a New Zealander. ‘Could you take us back in the tomb, mate?’ One of them clapped David on the shoulder excitedly. ‘We wanna see what it’s like with just a few of us. What about it? Huh?’

David considered it. ‘Not on your life.’

‘Oh, come on, mate. Aren’t you intrigued? Don’t you wanna know what might happen?’

David looked from one to the other. ‘I don’t have to worry about that,’ he said with finality, ‘I’m back in the bloody place tomorrow night.’

‘Aw, go on.’

‘No.’

‘Look, we’ll buy you a beer afterwards.’

David stroked his chin. ‘All right then.’

The Antipodeans grinned at each other. There was a cough from behind them. Alice was standing unnoticed in the darkness, half-hidden behind a large gravestone. ‘I’m going back in too.’

David opened his mouth. Then he shut it again. Finally, he shrugged: ‘It’s your life,’ he said, somewhat tactlessly.

The small party hurried back through the Covenanters’ Prison and, after a bit of hesitation, entered the Black Mausoleum once more. The men walked around in the dark, feeling the walls and taking photographs.

‘I don’t know what you expect to see,’ David said as he ran a hand over the rough stone, ‘it’s just a vault.’

There was a strangled sound in the corner and the men whirled round. Alice staggered backwards and hit the side of the tomb. Her eyes bulged and she gasped for breath, as if she couldn’t get enough air into her lungs. David and the others gathered round her in a panic, but she did not even seem to see them.

‘Get her out of here!’ David grabbed the woman’s arm and, with the help of the other men, he bundled her out of the Black Mausoleum. It was as if an electric current had been turned off. Alice’s eyes snapped back into focus and she quickly struggled upright, all signs of her breathing difficulties gone. Apart from being absolutely terrified, she seemed perfectly fine.

‘What happened?’ she whispered. ‘How did I get out here?’

‘You had a wee problem,’ David said. He turned to the rest of the astonished group. ‘So. Anyone want another go?’

Nobody did.

David led them out of the Covenanters’ Prison and locked the gate. He turned back and looked through the bars. It was so dark that he could not even see the offending tomb. ‘Jesus,’ he said quietly, ‘I hope it never gets any stronger than that.’

However, Jeremy – one of the Australians – was so impressed he returned on the tour six times before his Scottish stay was over.

The guides sat in Greyfriars Bobby. It was April and there were no tours that night, for the wind was howling and rain was bouncing off the pavements. It was a melancholy night, coming near the end of a long, harsh winter and, though it was now spring, there seemed nothing fresh or new about the world. This air was reflected in the lack of conversation around the guides’ table, despite the number of empty glasses. Of the City of the Dead guides, only Kate, Ben, Cara and David remained. Andrew’s father had been injured in a car crash and he had left to concentrate on his counselling work, deciding to care for people rather than scare them. The remaining City of the Dead guides were dressed identically in black leather, as they always did now. It had begun as a joke and turned into just-the-way-things-were, as happens so often in life. Even Cara’s golden hair was dyed jet-black.

There was little laughter in the bar and most of the seats were empty. Each guide was lost in his or her own thoughts. They were glad there was no tour. It was cold, and it had been cold for months. Somehow, too, though it was just a thought lingering at the corners of their minds, they felt that the Mackenzie Poltergeist was beginning to overshadow them and the hard work they did.

David sighed and got to his feet. He looked at Ben Scott. ‘To hell with this,’ he announced, breaking the mood. ‘Whisky, buddy? Kate? Cara?’

‘Aye. Why not?’

Seven whiskies later they were discussing the meaning of life in loud voices.

‘I believe that, when you die, your soul travels to the town where you spent your first holiday.’ David was expounding alternative theologies. ‘It lives forever in the window of your favourite shop.’

‘Damn,’ said Ben. ‘The Stirling Co-op doesn’t have any windows.’

‘You’re headed for eternal damnation anyway,’ Kate grinned.

‘Theology,’ Ben waved a drunken hand. ‘Don’t get me started.’ Then he started. ‘I’ll tell you what. Take your original gods, right? Pagan, Egyptian, Greek . . . Imagine they’re us, right? Sitting up on Olympus playing lutes and stuff.’

‘Are we wearing those bedsheet things?’ Cara always liked to know details.

‘If I’m a god, I’m wearing Gucci.’

‘You’ve got your Zeus, Hera, Aphrodite, Diana . . . Vulcan.’

‘Like Mr Spock?’

‘And Doctor Zeus.’

‘And Doctor Spock.’

‘Actually,’ Kate said solemnly, ‘Vulcan was a Roman god. So was Diana.’

Ben didn’t even question how she knew.

‘Exactly,’ he said. ‘All interchangeable. Be Roman if you like.’

‘I’ll need a new outfit then.’

‘Whatever.’ Ben took a deep drag on his cigarette and ash drifted down over Mount Olympus. ‘The more we mortals learn, the less our gods fit with what we discover. We change our conception of the almighty to fit our growing knowledge until he becomes some blind cosmic force. An amorphous blob.’

‘I have put on a bit of weight,’ Cara said patting her stomach.

‘In this day and age we need proof,’ Ben continued, ‘proof that there’s life after death – that there’s a point to the mess this world has always been in. Proof that there is a god who will make it all worth while.’

‘No, we don’t.’ David sat back with his whisky. ‘Lots of people just believe.’

Ben had forgotten that David’s parents were religious. ‘Aye,’ he agreed, ‘but it’s getting harder, and for some of us it’s impossible.’ He gestured at the wall of the pub. Unseen, on the other side of the building, the graveyard and its myriad tombs glistened like the back of a giant sleeping dragon. ‘What do you think that poltergeist is? I’ll tell you what it is. If it really exists, it’s physical proof that there is something beyond this otherwise pointless world. Good or bad, people want to believe in it because . . . well . . . because it means there’s something to believe in.’

‘But you don’t believe in the poltergeist.’ Kate put a hand on his arm.

‘It hasn’t done enough to convince me.’ Ben took another gulp of his drink, spilling it slightly.

Kate frowned. Ben rarely got drunk, no matter how much he consumed. If he did, it was a sure sign that he was unhappy.

‘I want something big to happen. One big thing out there that I can’t disprove.’

‘What? You want a burning bush on your tour?’

‘I don’t get anything happening on my tours any more.’ Ben stubbed out his cigarette violently. ‘I always used to. Bloody poltergeist’s deserted me.’

‘What about the things going on in your house?’ Cara asked.

‘Great. Now I don’t have to go out in the cold to hear a few banging noises.’

Kate grinned: ‘You never usually do.’

But Ben would not be diverted.

‘It’s the way we are,’ he said. ‘We think we adapt as the centuries go past, but that’s not true. If you believe we do, try walking through the Grassmarket on a Saturday night. We’ve just slapped a thin veneer of bendable morals and breakable rules over our lives and called it civilisation. Deep down we’re still primitive, competitive, violent, selfish and quite willing to believe in things there’s no evidence for – including our poltergeist. Well, that’s not good enough for me.’

‘Science can explain the poltergeist.’ David was playing the devil’s advocate, but had got closer to the truth than he knew. ‘You’ve been trying to prove that since we started.’

‘Oh, c’mon love,’ Kate pointed to Ben, ‘his theories make the Flat Earth Society sound sensible.’

‘I stand by science, yes,’ Ben countered. ‘And no, I don’t rule out anything. Science is getting more and more complex and that makes more things possible to accept. Scientists have found matter so small it can’t even be said to really exist, yet they say the universe is made up of this matter.’ It occurred to Ben that the ‘they’ he was referring to sounded almost as elusive as the poltergeist.

‘That doesn’t make sense.’ Cara was examining her whisky to see how much matter was left in the glass.

‘Exactly.’ Finishing his drink to avoid similar contemplation, Ben continued: ‘If it’s true, though, the universe isn’t physical either; it’s one giant thought. If that’s true, there’s no reason why I can’t have a poltergeist at the end of my graveyard.’

‘Or fairies at the bottom of your garden.’

‘The point is, the more we know, the more it blurs,’ Ben slurred. ‘The more we know about knowing, the more we’re not sure what knowing is.’

‘Could you repeat that?’

‘Yeah. Can you say it and drink a pint at the same time?’

‘We shouldn’t need religion or pseudoscience or . . .’ Ben looked lost.

‘Friends?’

Ben took another gulp. ‘We shouldn’t need astrology or counsellors or psychiatrists – not that I can afford one.’

‘That’s obvious.’

‘Well, I give up.’ Ben finished his pint with a flourish. ‘I’m not responsible for the stupidity in this world. Poltergeist? I’m not saying it’s true or not true anymore. I’m not playing its game. I’m not chasing it round trying to get it to prove it’s really there. I’m not even going to think about it.’

‘However, there is a possibility that he will write a country and western song about it.’ Cara patted him on the shoulder.

‘There is a possibility that I will sing a country and western song about it, yes.’

Ben smiled, for the first time that night. ‘Another drink, anyone?’

Lighting a cigarette, Kate peered at him from under a fringe of hair. A small curl of smoke drifted round her head like a halo. ‘You really want this poltergeist to exist, don’t you?’ she said.

Ben rose to his feet. Suddenly he seemed sober again, back to his old self.

‘Of course I do. I’m just like anyone else, aren’t I?’

The leather-clad guides looked at each other. Cara winked at Ben. David rose. It suddenly struck Kate that David looked like the photographs she had seen of Ben when he was that age.

‘I’ll help you get the drinks,’ David said, and he and Ben went together to the bar. While they stood waiting to be served, David felt a tap on his shoulder. An elderly gentleman stood behind them. ‘I hope you don’t mind my interrupting.’ His accent was pleasantly northern, perhaps from Skye. ‘I heard you talking about Greyfriars.’

‘That’s right,’ David said curtly. ‘Pint of lager please, Ben.’

‘My name’s Alex,’ the man said. David shook the proffered hand. ‘I was at a lecture over at the museum.’ He indicated the round building across the street from the bar, a towering extension added to the old Museum of Scotland which totally obscured the ancient building it was supposed to complement. In the daytime the pink edifice looked like it was built from blocks of processed ham, at night it was lit to make sure nobody missed the onslaught of progress. ‘Since I was in the area I went and looked at the cemetery. The last time I was in there was a couple of years ago.’

David nodded politely.

‘The Covenanters’ Prison is locked now. It wasn’t then.’

Ben’s ears pricked up and he turned to look at Alex for the first time. He seemed like any stolid Scot, white-haired, with a whisky in his hand.

‘I went in there last time, and the strangest thing happened.’

‘What was that?’ Both David and Ben had his full attention now.

Alex sipped his drink. He seemed a little embarrassed. ‘I was walking between the tombs and I looked into one and all of a sudden . . .’ Alex paused. He seemed lost in his recollection, or searching for a way to express it properly.

‘Yes?’ Ben and David spoke together.

‘Well, I started to cry. I was weeping, actually. I don’t know why.’ He looked from one guide to the other with clear blue eyes. They made a strange trio, David and Ben in black and Alex in his neat tweed jacket, each almost a generation apart.

‘I don’t cry,’ the old man said simply. ‘I don’t know what came over me. I mean, I don’t cry.’ He sipped his drink again. ‘I’m Scottish.’

To Alex, this was explanation enough to make his actions astonishing.

‘Was it on the left-hand side, this tomb?’

‘Yes. About halfway down. How did you know?’

David and Ben looked at each other. ‘You want a whisky, Alex?’ Ben said.

‘Och no. I just nipped in for one on the way home.’ Alex shook his head. He seemed more surprised at telling this story to two complete strangers than the original incident. He finished his drink, nodded to the guides and left the bar.

David turned to Ben. ‘It’s a strange world, isn’t it?’

‘It is,’ Ben agreed. ‘And even stranger around here.’

Ben looked out of the window. Old Alex was walking slowly up the rainy street in the direction of the graveyard, the statue of Greyfriars Bobby staring sightlessly after him. A group of youngsters pushed past him, shouting to each other, but Alex ignored them. Perhaps the old man was of the same type as Bobby’s legendary master, a taciturn, solitary Scotsman needing no more than a little dog for companionship as he marked out his time on earth. Or perhaps he had once wanted to change the world. Either way he was now just a little old man, who sat alone in bars and could not explain how he felt.

David peered round Ben’s shoulder, but Alex had disappeared, like a ghost, into the night.

‘What are you staring at?’

‘Don’t know. The future?’

David regarded the black glass, which was spattered with gusting rain.

‘Really? Looks pretty dark.’

‘Doesn’t it just.’

And they picked up their drinks and carried them back to the table.





Raymond, Kevin, Mandy, Carol


These accounts were collected from different members of a tour party who entered the Covenanters’ Prison on 9 April 2001. They called City of the Dead later to explain what had happened on and after the tour.





RAYMOND GRIEVE IS A PSYCHIC WHO HAD COME ON THE TOUR TO SEE WHAT HE COULD SENSE:


I have always had psychic ability and can sense or see spirits. Before we even got to the Covenanters’ Prison, I ‘saw’ something: as Cara, the guide, was telling us about John Porteous, I saw a man standing next to the tour that nobody else was aware of. As soon as I went through the Covenanters’ Prison gates I felt that there was an awful lot of supernatural activity. I saw a small boy inside one of the tombs near the entrance. There was also a woman farther down the Covenanters’ Prison. When we got into the tomb [the Black Mausoleum] I saw a man standing outside the tomb opposite. There was another man at the bottom of the Covenanters’ Prison, but we did not go down that far.





KEVIN IS 11 YEARS OLD:


When I was standing in the tomb [the Black Mausoleum], something soft, like cotton-wool, was touching my eyes and cheek. There was nobody doing this to me. The next day I woke up with a black eye and scratches on my face and my neck.





MANDY BURGEN, 25, FROM CORNWALL:


In the tomb I felt a pain just above my chest. Once the tour was finished and I got back to my car, I unfastened my top and found a large red mark where the pain had been. I showed it to the others in the car and in front of their eyes three weals rose up in the same place. The next day they were completely gone.





CAROL WEIR, 38, FROM EDINBURGH:


As soon as the tour was finished, a number of people told me that, inside the tomb, they had felt a strange sensation all over their bodies – it was like itching or pins and needles. I was intrigued and checked my arms and face to see if I had any of the unexplained scratches the tour guide had told me about, but there was nothing. It was late when I got home so I went straight to bed. It was then that I noticed the two scratches on my right arm that had just appeared.





The Black Mausoleum


Was the exorcism a success? A week later the tours resumed. The spirits remained defiant.

THE WORLD’S SCARIEST PLACES, FOX FAMILY CHANNEL, 19 MARCH 2001

How do you sleep at night?

(on hearing the story of the Mackenzie Poltergeist)

OUT OF DOORS, RADIO SCOTLAND, 21 APRIL 2001



Ben Scott sat alone in his room. It was Easter Sunday. Ben liked Easter – it was guaranteed there would be a religious epic on afternoon television, and he liked religious epics. The music was stirring, there were lots of big stars hamming it up in little roles and he loved the looks of awe and heroic determination on the characters’ faces. They were expressions Ben Scott felt he didn’t see much in real life.

He had led an interesting life, had done pretty much whatever jobs came along, from toilet cleaner to financial consultant. He’d directed a children’s theatre in New York, worked in a pornography store in Texas and painted murals in Colorado. He’d been a cocktail barman, pepper salesman, stamp designer and balloon decorator. He’d even worked as an Easter bunny, looking more threatening than festive, stuffed into a large pink fluffy costume.

Now the day had faded and he was sitting in his room. A half-empty bottle of wine sat beside him, his only company, and a cigarette coughed dirty smoke from the ash-filled pool of an old eggcup.

Once Ben had felt indestructible. He had cultivated an enigmatic persona and charmed women with this careless, carefree disguise. His delight had been the late night smoky bar, drink in one hand, cigarette in the other and a story on his lips. Now he felt old before his time, and tired. His back hurt – he had jumped from a train into a snowdrift in the Rocky Mountains and the injury had never healed. Ben’s stomach hurt too, the result of years of hard drinking combined with the ever-present feeling that his life had been nothing more than a series of exotic memories. Now they were fading like a photograph in a sunlit window.

Ben Scott was afraid. Afraid of being alone. Afraid that nothing meant anything. Afraid to sleep. Afraid of disappointment. Afraid of death. And he realised that, somewhere along the line, he had become afraid of life. He wondered if this was because he loved life too much. Perhaps he couldn’t bring himself to care about something that would be taken away from him. Perhaps because of this he had never really become involved in life at all. Ben knew he was merely watching his existence wandering past, and had done so for as long as he could remember. He sat in a musty tomb created by his own fear, and watched an endless stream of strangers pass in and out. Sometimes he tried to reach out and touch them – and when he did he succeeded – but then he would retreat back into the darkness before anyone could really see him.

Ben was at a loose end this Easter night. He had rearranged all the photographs in his photograph album, as he liked to do – he could look at the pictures and remember a little of how it had felt to be in them. Then he threw away any in which he wasn’t nice looking, in case he died of a heart attack before he got round to ditching them. Now there was nothing left to do but drink and smoke and think about how much he was drinking and smoking. At a push, he supposed, he could think of life and what it all meant, but that was an activity he tried to avoid unless it was daylight. He knew the other guides were in Greyfriars Bobby Bar and that he could go and join them, but jovial banter was too much of an effort these days. Ben had done a lot of talking over the years. He didn’t think he had much left to say. All his life, he had gone where fate had taken him, and now it wasn’t taking him anywhere. Or perhaps he had spent his life running from commitment, from responsibility, from any door that might close. Perhaps nobody expected anything from him any more and so he had nothing left to run from.

Ben Scott was feeling pretty sorry for himself.

There was a loud swish of bead curtains from just outside the living-room and the bathroom door suddenly closed. Ben got up and went into the hall. He put his hand out and held it at various heights, but could not feel a draught. He returned to the living-room. The half-empty bottle of wine sat on his desk, the cigarette silently burning itself out next to it. Beside his own glass sat an empty one meant for a friend who, in the end, he couldn’t be bothered inviting.

The living-room door had swung open as he stood looking at the four walls in which he now spent his life. He turned and regarded the bead curtains, splendid in their fluorescent green, now as quiet as an expectant pause. ‘Are you real?’ he said in the direction of the motionless sparkling beads. ‘You’re more real than me, I think. People believe in you.’ He looked at the clock on his wall. It was nearly midnight.

Fetching the ladder from the hall, he dragged it into the living-room, pulled up the blind on his window, opened it and pushed the ladder out until it sank into the soft earth of the graveyard below. He put on his long, black leather coat and stuck his cigarettes in the pocket, opened his cupboard, took out a flashlight and put that in his pocket too. Then, taking his bottle of wine and the empty glass in one hand, Ben levered himself out of the window and climbed down the ladder into Greyfriars.

It was as black a night as he had ever seen in the cemetery. There were few stars, and no sign of any moon. The church was nothing but a shapeless lump of coal and the tombstones were oily black stumps. The trees were bare and twisted. Greyfriars looked like hell with the fires put out.

Ben began to walk towards the Covenanters’ Prison.

There was a soft wind blowing and it whispered as it danced along the grass. Ben took the middle path, which skirted the church and headed up towards the locked gates. His flashlight illuminated a tiny patch of ground in front of him, which only made the rest of the graveyard seem darker. Despite his best efforts he could not help shining the torch at each tomb he passed in case someone, or something, was hiding there. The beam lit up skeletons and skulls and sad testimonies from those long dead. As he rounded the church he finally glimpsed the moon, a small sliver of light like a half-shut eye, hanging over the Covenanters’ wall, not bright enough to even dent the shadows. Ben reached the gates, brought out his keys and opened the near-invisible padlock with an ease borne of long practice. He stepped inside and began to walk down the dark alley of the Covenanters’ Prison. On impulse he stopped and walked back the way he came, then took out his keys once more and locked the gate behind him.

It seemed colder in here, but that might be because the chill spring air was finally getting to him. Puffs of wispy condensation escaped his lips as he made his way towards the Black Mausoleum. On either side the doorways of tombs, slick with recent rain, gaped hungrily. Or perhaps, Ben thought, they were open-mouthed at his stupidity. With the gates locked he knew he was completely alone. If anything was going to confront him here, it was not going to be human.

He reached the Black Mausoleum and stood looking at it. It seemed no different from any other tomb. Across from its entrance was a low wall. Ben sat down on it and poured himself a glass of wine. ‘Well,’ he said, ‘here I am.’ He lit a cigarette. ‘So what do we do now? Sing “Kumbaya”?’

The Black Mausoleum stayed silent.

‘Thirty-eight seems a bit old to finally acquire an imaginary friend.’ Ben looked around. His eyes were getting used to the darkness. The branches of the trees overhead were deathly still and he could hear no wind, nothing but the quiet sound of life that was his own breathing. ‘You know, I used to live in America,’ he said to the Mackenzie Poltergeist. ‘I went to a cocaine factory. I’ve been chased by a bear.’

The mausoleum seemed unimpressed.

‘I’ve never seen the Grand Canyon, though. Never been to Las Vegas. Have you?’

Ben looked around again. The sliver of moon was reflected in puddles and wispy touches of silver gilded the grotesque carvings that surrounded him. It suddenly occurred to him that the Covenanters’ Prison right now was as beautiful as anything he had ever seen. ‘I bet there are people who come here that have seen the Grand Canyon and are just as impressed with you – in a different way, of course.’ Ben sipped his wine, then raised his glass to the mausoleum gate. ‘Hell, I can bring you people from Las Vegas. Everyone takes a gamble when they come to see the Mackenzie Poltergeist.’

The tomb stayed silent.

‘I suppose I should just come inside, eh?’ He stood up and put down his glass, walked over to the door, then stopped. ‘But I always find that when you get right inside something, or someone, you’ve nowhere left to go.’ He put his hand in his pocket and pulled out his bunch of keys. Finding the one that unlocked the Black Mausoleum padlock, he bent down to open it.

The vault padlock was gone.

Kate had done the tour earlier that night. Kate never left the gate unlocked.

Ben felt a jolt in his chest. He shone the flashlight in a wild arc. The padlock lay broken a few feet away, glistening in the damp grass. The hairs on the back of Ben Scott’s neck slowly began to rise. Aware that he had his back to the tomb, he whirled round and shone the light inside. There was nothing but cold, empty stone. ‘Don’t you do this to me,’ he said softly. But it was too late.

Suddenly Ben Scott felt afraid. He was not numb; he was not tired; he was afraid like he had never been afraid before. A second ago he had been ready to enter the tomb, sing a few bars of a folk song and walk back out again. Now his skin was crawling, his teeth were set on edge and a primitive grimace was locked onto his face. He couldn’t go into the tomb. He knew it with a certainty he had rarely felt. Terror, deep and thick and cold as the bottom of the ocean, prevented it. He did not know if he was terrified that he would find the poltergeist in there or if he was terrified he would not. All he knew was that he didn’t want to know.

He turned and ran full speed back up the Covenanters’ Prison, leaving his wine and cigarettes behind. His keys scrabbled at the lock on the gate and he flung it open and slammed it behind him again. He ran through the graveyard between crosses and skeletons and tombs and, as he ran, he began to jump, landing heavily on the pliant earth and kicking up wedges of soil. He stopped halfway and did a little dance, his heart pounding in his chest. Then he ran again and didn’t stop until he neared the graveyard exit. His breath came in ragged gasps and he bent over, holding his knees. ‘Jesus. I’ve got to stop smoking,’ he told himself.

The exit of the graveyard was like a gateway to another dimension. The cemetery lamp, set in an iron arch over the exit, signalled the end of one place and the beginning of somewhere very different. Through the narrow rectangle Ben could see the lights of the Museum of Scotland and, as he got closer, a car flashed past along the street outside, like a giant shining bug. Deserted tenements rose in cliffs on either side and, as he moved into their shadow, they blotted out the stars one by one.

Ben stopped before turning into the exit. There wasn’t a sound in the graveyard. Outside he could hear the crude buzz of night revellers punctuated by drunken yowls. Like ants, they crawled from one bar to another, fighting, mating, and swarming. In here the ground was filled with humanity who no longer served a purpose, outside they walked around, only a breath away from their silent cousins. They didn’t even know it.

Ben Scott bent and touched the soft, wet grass. ‘I spend too much time in this damned place.’ Then he walked out of the cemetery.

From the graveyard entrance to Ben’s front door it was just 20 yards, the only thing between them being the big bow-fronted windows of Greyfriars Bobby’s bar. Some of the individual panes had swirling glass ampoules, giving the place a Victorian look. Ben peered inside. He could see Kate, Cara, David and Duncan talking, laughing, smoking and drinking, as people had done in there for 200 years. The light from the windows spilled onto the pavement, showing up the litter.

Ben stood on the wet pavement. The cold Easter wind blew out of the graveyard entrance like a last breath being exhaled. He took out the keys to his front door. In his house the fire was on and he could drink wine and smoke cigarettes and not have to bother speaking, or listening, or caring. In his house he could sit on his window seat and stare out into the darkness of the cemetery.

Ben looked round at the statue of Greyfriars Bobby. Someone had put a traffic cone on the dog’s head. For a second he pursed his lips, the way old people do when nothing amuses them any more. Then he began to laugh. The door of the pub opened. A group of teenagers, jostling and giggling, poured out of the brightly illuminated bar into Candlemaker Row.

Ben Scott put his keys back in his pocket and walked past them into the light.





Kate


Written statement sent by Kate Luskin from Massachusetts in May 2001. Kate entered the Black Mausoleum a month earlier on 15 April 2001, the night before Easter Sunday.

My name is Kate Luskin and I was on a trip to England and Scotland a few weeks ago. I went on a City of the Dead tour and I was scared out of my wits by what I felt when we entered the Covenanters’ Prison, and especially the Black Mausoleum. I was right at the back of the tomb and began to feel really dizzy and faint.

The tour guide, Cara, told us that if we suddenly got cold, or felt something was touching us, we should immediately move from the spot where we were standing. Then I felt something ice-cold hooking on to my ankle. I quickly moved away – I thought I must just be overreacting and I didn’t want to tell anyone what had happened. But I started to shiver and couldn’t stop. It was all too much and I began crying.

After the tour was over I was still shaking and shivering, but I was sure I had just scared myself. Yet my left ankle was cold and stayed that way for the rest of the night and the next day. I play softball, and am developing a tan from being out in the sun so much. Now there are three lines on my left ankle where it was touched in the tomb and they will not tan – they stay pale no matter how much I am in the sun. This has never happened to me before. There is nothing odd on my left ankle, only on my right – the marks look like nail scratches but are not red and simply will not get darker. The odd thing is, that part of my ankle is now always freezing cold.

It probably sounds stupid, but it’s starting to freak me out a little.




The Mackenzie Poltergeist is as strong as ever. If anything, its attacks have increased in severity, and it is now regarded as the best-documented paranormal case in history.

David, Cara and Derek eventually left City of the Dead. Then they came back. Some people are gluttons for punishment.

On the fifth anniversary of the first recorded poltergeist attack, just before Hallowe’en, Ben Scott’s house and the City of the Dead office burned to the ground. The adjoining buildings were completely unscathed and no official cause could be found for the fire. Ben gave up being a tour guide to concentrate on a writing career. Kate emigrated to New Zealand.

Despite the poltergeist’s fame, or more likely because of it, visitors still take the tour, stand in the darkness and hope that something will happen to them. After all, they don’t really believe they’ll encounter a supernatural entity on a ghost tour in the middle of the capital city of one of the most civilised countries on the planet.

Until they do.




Edinburgh Centre


There are a few places it would be impossible to miss out in a book like this, despite the location already being well known. Edinburgh is a beautiful and vibrant city, however, it has not always been that way. There is a dark side to Edinburgh’s history, which has led to it being considered one of the most haunted places in the country. Despite this, although many of the city’s former less savoury characters, such as Burke and Hare, are well known, the associated ghost stories are on contrast less known.



Much of this dark past relates to the way the city developed. Edinburgh was once relatively small, surrounded by large walls for protection. To the North lay the Nor Loch (North Lake), now drained to create the picturesque Princess Street Gardens, but formerly it was a lake in which all the sewage from the city drained from open sewers into the streets.



Many people were attracted to Edinburgh to seek their fortune, but once within the city walls they found out there was no employment. They could not leave freely as there was a charge to leave the city and with no employment, people could not afford this fee. The city officials’ method to deal with homelessness was to make it illegal. This drove the homeless into hiding and, as the city developed, they were quite literally underground, which leads to the first location. Many people have heard of the Underground Vaults, they are regularly visited and so they are probably the best known location included in this book. I decided to include them, as although people may have heard of them, they may not know much about them or what to expect when visiting.





South Street Vaults




Part of the giant development of the city was to build bridges connecting the natural hills that form part of the city’s landscape. The South Bridge was finally completed in 1788 and is essentially a street in its own right, with houses and shops lining the sides. The supporting structure for the bridge consists of numerous vaulted rooms, which are up to 3 levels high in some areas. These rooms were used as store rooms and workshops for the various businesses, including those on the street of the South Bridge, however it was soon discovered that water from the street level was soaking through the stonework of the bridge, resulting in damage to any stock kept in the vaults, and so the businesses soon abandoned these vaults, creating an ideal opportunity for the homeless to move in.



With no natural daylight, water constantly dripping from the ceilings and no sanitation, the living conditions were terrible and crime was subsequently rife. Victims of crime could not seek any help from the officials, because to do so would mean they exposed themselves as being homeless, which would result in them being punished (the standard punishment was being flogged and with the living conditions at the time, it would only be a short while before the wounds became infected and the person would die). It is reported that the infamous serial killers, Burke and Hare, found at least two of their victims within the vaults walls.



As conditions worsened with the water ingress further weakening the structure, the vaults were eventually abandoned around the mid 1800s. Some were filled with rubble to add necessary support for the street above, and the vaults were sealed and forgotten about. They were however re-discovered by sheer chance in the 1980s, and some of the safer vaults have been re-opened as visitor attractions.





Blair Street Vaults




Beneath the West side of the South Bridge are the Blair Street Vaults. This labyrinth of vaulted rooms is considered to be particularly active for paranormal experiences. Probably the most common report is hearing loud, heavy footsteps, thus leading to the spirit being named Mr Boots. On occasion, Mr Boots has also been seen, previously being described as a large man with a tri-corner hat, a long coat and (unsurprisingly) heavy boots. He is often reported as being seen standing inside doorways, as though preventing outside entry, he is further considered to be a sinister figure. It is thought that Mr Boots was a watcher in the vaults, someone who kept an eye on the vaults for the merchants, and that he continues to fulfil that role till this very day. Mr Boots has been experienced in almost all areas of the vaults.



One of the vaults is considered to be haunted by a cobbler, often seen and considered to create a happy atmosphere. Mr Boots is reported to not enter this vault, and it is largely speculated that the cobbler prevents him from doing so, as he does not want the negative energy of Mr Boots in the happy atmosphere of his vault. In the corner of the same vault there is however, a less pleasant spirit of a lady dressed entirely in black, who seems to prey on pregnant women that dare to stand in her corner.



The Blair Street Vaults are also reportedly haunted by a small boy, who is primarily heard laughing and is reported to try to hold visitors’ hands, and also a dog, which runs between visitors’ legs.



Access can be gained to the Blair Street Vaults through an organised tour with Mercat Tours. The vaults themselves are entered through a door at the street level. I have visited Blair Street Vaults twice, and they are indeed an unnerving place to visit, partly I feel due to them being fairly disorientating. As you walk around them, you begin to lose awareness of where you are and where the exit is. The vaults are dark and damp, which adds to the atmosphere and it is easy to see why so many people find them terrifying places to be. The costumed guide will lead you from vault to vault, stopping in each section of specific interest to recall the tales of what has previously happened in the area.



Despite the many reports of hauntings in the vaults, during my visits I encountered nothing that I would consider unusual or untoward, and unfortunately no photographs showed anything out of the ordinary.





Niddry Street Vaults


Beneath the East side of the bridge lies the Niddry Street Vaults. The tours are organised by Auld Reekie Tours (Auld Reekie is an old name for Edinburgh City). Curiously, access is gained by climbing a set of stairs up to a first floor apartment, but it is important to bear in mind the geography of Edinburgh and that Niddry Street slopes steeply down the side of the South Bridge and so as you reach the lower end of the street, you are actually several stories below the street level of the South Bridge. Buildings stand all the way down the side of the South Bridge, and behind these lie the underground vaults.



The story initially told on the tour surrounding the rediscovery of these vaults is that students were living in the apartment and when moving a table, they hit the rear wall. After hearing a hollow noise, they decided there must have been an old cupboard or something behind the wall and they then set about opening up the wall to make the room bigger. What they discovered instead was the access door to the vaults. I don’t know if this story is true, but access is certainly gained through a hole in the wall at the back of an apartment.



The vaults here are less disorientating than the Blair Street vaults, as they are all accessed from a wide corridor and are not in any way interconnected.





At the lowest point of the accessible section of vaults is a pagan temple, which is still in regular use today. Although visitors can view the temple, they are restricted from entering it. The above photograph shows the main corridor from which all of the vaults are accessed (to the left), taken from outside the pagan temple, looking up. Psychics said there are three different levels of paranormal activity within the vaults. The first area, up to the steps, is considered to have the lowest level of activity, where things can often be heard or seen, but there is no real threat. Beyond the steps is the second highest level of activity, where things are likely to be seen and felt. In two areas of the vaults the highest level of paranormal activity can be found, where the psychics have warned there is a real threat of physical harm.



At the top end of the vault network (beyond the steps pictured in the photograph) is the original pagan temple, which visitors can still access. This is one of the vaults whereby the paranormal activity level is at its highest. All that remains of the original temple is a stone circle. It is reported that when the vaults were first re-opened, the pagan coven selected this top vault as their temple, as it was at the highest point available and was the driest of the vaults. However, soon after they started meeting there, they felt a dark presence in the room and despite the temple being locked up when not in use, they would frequently find items knocked over and otherwise disturbed when they re-entered the temple. The story of exactly what happened in this vault varies greatly, but it is often said a mirror that had been put in the room was acting as a portal (either because it was cracked, or it had been bought second hand) and this allowed an evil entity to enter the vault. The witches formed the stone circle and cast a spell to keep any evil spirits from entering it. The leader of the coven is said to have spent the night inside the circle, determined to finally get to the bottom of what was going on. During the night, he heard noises as though something was walking around the circle, and then heard it climb the domed wall until he realised it was just above him. He jumped from the circle, and reversed the first spell so anything evil within the circle could not leave, and thus trapped the spirit inside it, where it is said to remain to this day.



The temple was moved to the other end of the vaults so it could be as far away from this vault as possible, and it is widely understood the witches do not approve of people being allowed to visit their former temple, fearing for their safety. Visitors are allowed to stand in the stone circle at their peril, but normally not until the guide leaves the vault. Reported experiences are people being pushed around once they enter the circle, feeling nauseous, being scratched or even sometimes fainting. People also report a run of bad luck in their life starting soon after stepping in the circle.



When visiting this vault in the past, I have never felt comfortable around the circle and only on one occasion has anyone actually been prepared to stand in the circle whilst I have been there. Although nothing happened to them, it is common for incidents to happen later, but even if this person was completely unaffected, I doubt I will ever personally step foot in this stone circle!



Close to the former pagan temple, is what is commonly known as the haunted vault, the second vault that is considered to have the highest level of activity. This vault is particularly dark, as it is reported even the emergency lighting constantly fails. It is also claimed that batteries for torches etc., are also drained in this room. Reports of activity within this room are numerous, with two entities being encountered. The first is a poltergeist, which is said to push around and scratch visitors. One part of the vault seems particularly active, with mostly women being affected, and so it is not uncommon for the male and female visitors to be separated before entering this vault, with the female visitors being kept away from the most active area. There is a degree of speculation regarding the identity of this poltergeist. It is said that it could either be the combined spirits of the many people who died in the vaults during a fire, combining to create one malevolent spirit. Another theory is that the poltergeist was the spirit of George MacKenzie. More details regarding MacKenzie are provided later in the book, however, he lived in Strichen’s Close, which was directly adjacent to Niddry Street. He was notorious in life, and even more so in death. The activity of the poltergeist has decreased while activity elsewhere in the city increased, only adding to the speculation that the vaults were the early haunt for the MacKenzie poltergeist.



The second ghost that is said to haunt this vault is a banshee. A banshee is a female ghost of Scottish and Irish folklore that foretells death. Banshees are often reported to stand looking down, but if you see a banshee that lifts her head and then lets out an ear piercing scream, that is perceived as a warning that a close relative will soon pass. Tales regarding this spirit within the vaults however are limited.



I have visited these vaults on several different occasions, but only on the most recent visit have I felt most uneasy while standing in the darkness of the haunted vault. This was also the only occasion when I have been there that the guide did not separate the male visitors from the female visitors. I instinctively walked to the more active side of the room, as I almost expected to be instructed to do so, but because the guide did not separate us, several female visitors also stood on that side of the room. It is entirely possible that I was just anticipating something happening, because I knew it was not normal for females to be allowed to stand at that side of the vault, or maybe the spirit energy was higher because of it, but either way, I was glad to get myself out!



The guides ask people not to take any photographs within this vault until after they have told you about it, but afterwards you are allowed to (at your own risk, as reportedly, cameras can stop working in the vault!). On one occasion, I caught a series of orbs. Many people believe that an orb is the first stage of a spirit manifestation, but I am not normally a believer in photographs of orbs; there are simply too many other things they could be such as dust, water droplets or insects. There is however a few things to remember with the vaults, they are dark, wet and entirely underground. The damp atmosphere makes any dust unlikely and similarly the darkness makes insects unlikely. Water droplets are possible, and are common in the vaults, especially if it has been raining outside, however, I cannot explain why water droplets would show up in different colours, as the orbs in the following picture do.





I was not only surprised by the number of orbs in the room, but just below and to the right side of the large orb in the centre of the picture, is a smaller, red orb. A close up is shown (apologies for the poor quality, it was taken with my old camera!).





By adjusting the contrast, a second orb surrounded by a red ring can be seen close to the top of the picture.



Many people believe a red orb signifies anything from stress and restlessness to pain and anger, all of which would seem to fit in with the negative stories surrounding this area. Interestingly, the white orb is far larger and is placed between the red orbs and is found in the most active corner of the vault. White orbs are believed to signify protection and shielding, so maybe there was someone or something in the vault protecting the visitors from danger.



There are also reports of a watcher in Niddry Street Vaults, who is similar by description to Mr Boots. It is not yet known whether this is the same spirit, but the watcher in the Niddry Street vaults is often reported to walk up and down the top area of the corridor (the section previously classed as having the second highest level of activity) and he does not seem to interact with any visitors. There are different classifications for haunting, and this watcher would be classed as a residual haunting, which is considered to be a memory replaying itself, sometimes on the anniversary of an event or sometimes simply, as would be the case with these reports, someone continuing to go about their day to day activities, oblivious to anyone else being present. It is thought sometimes these spirits do not even know that they are dead. Mr Boots in Blair Street Vaults would however be classed as an intelligent haunting as he does frequently interact and is aware of the presence of people within the vault, and so my own feeling is these are not the same spirit.





Mary King’s Close


In addition to the vaults, Edinburgh also has underground streets which can be visited at Mary King’s Close. A close is a narrow alleyway, and there are a number of them in Edinburgh. This particular close was named after Mary King, a prominent businesswoman who resided close by.



As the population of Edinburgh grew, the restricted space within the city walls meant buildings had to be built taller to house the influx of people, often over 10 stories high. The ground levels were occupied by businesses and were where the poorest people lived, closest to the open sewers in the streets. Just like the vaults, living conditions were dreadful, with families often living in one small room. Disease was rife in these living conditions, and when the plague arrived in Edinburgh, many people died in this area and the houses were subsequently abandoned. Once the plague finally left Edinburgh, people started to move back into the closes, however, people around the time were very superstitious. This superstition was added to by reports that to try to prevent the spread of the disease, the close had actually been sealed with victims of the plague who were simply left inside to die and so it was only time before reports of spirits of these plague victims within the closes.



Mary King’s Close and the neighbouring closes all slope steeply down from the Royal mile towards the Nor Loch, and in 1753 as part of the modernisation of the city, the top level of houses were demolished at the Royal Mile level and the remainder of the buildings were then used as foundations for the new Royal Exchange building. People continued to live and work in the closes for some time after, but eventually they were deserted.



There are numerous reports of hauntings within this network of closes, with the earliest record probably being the experiences suffered by the Coltheart family, who moved into one of the better quality properties in the close shortly after the period of plague. He was warned the property was haunted, but still moved in regardless. It is said that soon after moving in, Mr Coltheart fell ill, and whilst tending to him, his wife witnessed the phantom head of an old gentleman float across the room, staring at her. Mr Coltheart tried desperately to convince her she was mistaken in what she saw, until later in the night when he too witnessed the head float across the room, watching him carefully. Throughout the night other spirits including that of a small boy and even a dog joined the phantom head, but Mr Coltheart refused to flee. After several hours, with a loud moan, the spirits simply disappeared and the Colthearts continued to live in the house, undisturbed by the spirits.



More recent reports relate predominately to two of the former residents. Mr Andrew Chesney, who both resided and worked in the close, was the last resident to leave the close back in the 1890s. He is said to have resisted moving and even refused to sell his property to the council, but eventually when living conditions became too bad to tolerate, and under increasing pressure from the authorities, he had no option but to leave. He is reported to have returned to his former house and workshop, and does not seem happy about visitors. His house is well preserved and although entry is not permitted, you can still look inside. There are reports of noises from within the house including knocking sounds and sometimes doors being slammed. Investigations have produced good sounding digital voice recordings of a male voice responding to questions telling the investigators to get out.



The best-known spirit that's been reported in the close is little Annie, who it is said is looking for her mum. The spirit was first picked up on by a Japanese psychic back in 1992, who was part of a television programme exploring haunted locations. She is said to have initially picked up great sadness in the room before becoming aware of the spirit of a young girl, who has since been named Annie. It is said she was shut in after falling ill, possibly with the plague, and essentially left there to die. Many visitors claim to have experienced similarly strange phenomena in this room, ranging from feeling sad or sick to having their clothes tugged on. Her room is now a shrine, with many visitors leaving soft toys for little Annie.



There is also said to be the spirit of a small boy within the close, who is heard scratching from within a wall. It is reported he was either walled up inside a chimney, or he was employed as a chimney sweep, and after he became stuck while cleaning the chimney, he was again left to die.



I have visited Mary King’s Close twice. Unfortunately you are not permitted to take any photographs when visiting, due to it being a government owned property, and so I have no photographs to show you. Access is through a staircase from the retail area of the attraction, situated beside the Edinburgh City Chamber building on the Royal Mile. At the bottom of the stairs, you enter the top of Mary King’s Close and the costumed guide will lead you through some of the buildings to show the living conditions of the time. By going through the rooms within the buildings, you are led through to other closes that still remain accessible today, and you finally weave your way down to the bottom. The close is without a doubt atmospheric and it is very difficult not to feel something in Annie’s room, although it is likely that this is mainly due to the story you are told in the room. On both visits I felt nothing un-nerving, that is until the final stage of the tour, which is when you walk from the bottom of the steep close, back up to the top and towards the exit. On both occasions I felt as though I was being watched, and followed. This so happens to be the location of Mr Chesney’s house, however, on my first visit to the close it was on the historical tour and so I had no prior knowledge of the tales nor the haunting until after my second visit. There is a fixed high level camera about half way up the close where the group stops to get a souvenir photograph taken and this camera, when previously being tested, has caught the image of a man standing at the top of the close, and it is thought this may be Mr Chesney himself.



Tours round the close are organised through The Real Mary King’s Close. Booking is highly advisable to avoid any disappointment. I would recommend a tour of the close to anyone, even to those people with no interest in the supernatural, as the history of the close is simply fascinating. You will also be introduced to the plague doctor who operated in the area, Dr George Rae, who succeeded in treating victims of the plague without catching the disease himself due to the unusual protective clothing he wore, which included a long leather jacket and a ‘beak’ filled with cloves which he believed would filter the air he breathed in. Some believe it is this beak that led doctors in the UK to become known as ‘quacks’.


Greyfriars Kirkyard


Travelling to the Southern end of the old town, visitors will find Greyfriars Kirkyard, which is well known for the story of Greyfriars Bobby, the loyal dog who remained for many years at the foot of his master’s grave after his death. However, a look around the graveyard soon reveals many carvings of skeletons, skulls and other more sinister symbols.





Contained within the graveyard is the Covenanters’ Prison. The Covenanters were people from all types of backgrounds, but were primarily people who opposed the belief of the Stuart Kings of Scotland that they were the spiritual heads of the Church of Scotland. The Covenanters believed that no man, not even a king, could hold the position of the spiritual head of the church and only Jesus Christ could be the spiritual head of any Christian church. In 1638, the Covenanters signed the National Covenant to confirm their opposition to the stance taken by the Stuart Kings.



A period of great unrest followed, with some church ministers who supported the National Covenant being forced from their parishes. Some continued to preach wherever they could, and to do so was soon made an offence, punishable by death. Citizens who now failed to attend the church were questioned, sometimes under torture, to ensure they were not attending the now illegal preaching of ministers who had been forced out of their parishes. People were asked to take an oath to not only declare their utmost loyalty to the king, but to also accept the king’s position as the head of the church. Failure to take this oath could have resulted in execution by the military, which by this time were searching for rebels.



Sir George Mackenzie, mentioned previously in the section relating to the Niddry Street Vaults, was Lord Advocate in Edinburgh and a prolific prosecutor of the Covenanters. Following the Battle of Bothwell Bridge between the Covenanters and government troops on 22nd June 1679, he imprisoned around twelve hundred Covenanters in a field next to Greyfriars Kirkyard, the area now infamously known as the Covenanters’ Prison. In the following months some of the prisoners were executed, but unsurprisingly hundreds died from malnutrition and maltreatment, which lead to MacKenzie becoming known as bloody MacKenzie. Today, at the gates of the prison, a plaque provided by the Greyfriars Kirkyard Trust with the support of the Scottish Covenanter Memorials Association recalls the conditions within the prison at the time. It reads;



‘Behind these gates lies part of the southern section of Greyfriars Kirkyard which was used in 1679 as a prison for over one thousand supporters of the National Covenant who had been defeated by Government forces at the battle of Bothwell Brig on 22 June. For over four months these men were held here without any shelter, each man being allowed 4 ounces of bread a day. Kindly citizens were sometimes able to give more food.



Some of the prisoners died here, some were tried and executed for treason, some escaped and some were freed after signing a bond of loyalty to the crown.’



The plaque goes on to mention the locations of the memorials for the Covenanters, before continuing to describe the conditions within the prison:



‘The section of the kirkyard to imprison the Covenanters lay outside the existing South wall, and included the area now covered by buildings on Forrest Row. The area behind the gate was laid out for burials in 1705 and contains many fine monuments, but these did not exist as the time of the prison.’



With such a dark history, it is not surprising that the area is considered to be haunted, and ironically, when he passed away, George Mackenzie was laid to rest in the Black Mausoleum, very close to the entrance of the Covenanters’ prison.



Towards the end of the 1990s, it was reported that a homeless man, desperately seeking a place to sleep, had broken into the black mausoleum and then fell down into the inner chamber. He was witnessed fleeing from the kirkyard in pure terror from whatever he experienced inside that inner chamber. Since then, the levels of activity within the mausoleum and Covenanters’ prison has escalated, ranging from visitors in this area being pushed, scratched and sometimes even people passing out. Residents of the neighbouring houses, some of which are built on the ground which used to be part of the prison, as mentioned on the plaque quoted earlier, also started to report incidents such as items being smashed and several unexplained fires occurring. It was around this time the activity within the haunted vault of Niddry Street Vaults started to decline, hence the speculation that the homeless man had disturbed the MacKenzie Poltergeist within his final resting place, resulting in the energy moving to the kirkyard where he continues to persecute the Covenanters today.



Such was the level of activity, and frequency of people reporting injuries, Edinburgh City Council arranged to have the prison and mausoleum locked off. Access is now only viable through City of the Dead tours. It is reported that the frequency of incidents on these tours remains high, and also that Mackenzie’s coffin within the black mausoleum frequently moves around, with it being said he cannot find peace.



I have yet to go on one of the tours, which are mainly held in the evenings, no doubt adding to the atmosphere. I have however visited the kirkyard during the day, and found it to be a relatively quiet, peaceful place. That was until I took some photographs of the Covenanters’ prison.



As mentioned earlier, locked gates prevent access to the prison, however, wanting a better record and being ever hopeful of catching evidence, I then proceeded to stick my camera through the gates to take a few photographs, the below being just one example.





Nothing unusual showed up in the photograph and this is only shown to illustrate what the prison looks like. However, as I was taking the photographs within the prison, I watched through the bars showing the battery charge on my camera disappear one by one, before the camera switched off, with no charge. Further round, I tried the camera again, and it worked perfectly, but when I returned to the prison, the same thing happened again before I could take but a single photograph! Later that evening, I switched on the camera, and was able to browse through the photographs without the need to recharge it, it seemed the only place it drained of power was within the grounds of the Covenanters’ prison. Although I could find nothing out of the ordinary in the few photographs I did take, there is definitely something very strange happening at Greyfriars Kirkyard and I most certainly will be returning.



Access to the kirkyard is completely free and it can be located at the bottom of Chamber Street in the Grassmarket area of the city.





Craigmillar Castle, Edinburgh


To the South East of the city centre lies Craigmillar Castle. It is difficult to believe when visiting this magnificent fortified town-house, enjoying the peace and scenery, that you are only a few miles away from the vibrant and lively city centre.





Craigmillar castle started out as a tower house, built in the late 14th century. It was later developed to have a walled inner courtyard, with the walls further incorporating a labyrinth of rooms. An outer courtyard was later added, creating a large walled area that housed gardens, a church and a private family chapel. The above photograph was taken from within the outer courtyard and shows the ruins of the chapel to the left, the large walls surrounding the inner courtyard and the original tower house within. Although now in ruins, the building remains well preserved and most areas can still be accessed, including the top of the tower house that provides views right across Edinburgh all the way to the Firth of Forth and Fife.



Within the walls of the inner courtyard lies a basement prison where it is said a skeleton, standing upright, was found in the early 1800s.



Found at the entrance to the castle is a pair of ancient yew trees. They are now twisted and bent but are believed to have once provided wood to make the bows used for the protection of the castle.



My visit to the castle was for historical interest only. I had no prior knowledge of any paranormal incidents within the castle. The castle is maintained and operated by Historic Scotland and an entrance fee is charged to all non-members. Once inside the castle you are really free to explore whichever part you wish, although care and common sense is required and some of the inner rooms can be disorientating as you work your way around. Despite the external condition, the castle retains many of it’s original features, including the great hall with high vaulted ceilings and a gothic-style fire place.



During my visit, I felt nothing out of the ordinary whatsoever, but I did take several photographs. When leaving, as I always do, I asked a member of staff if there were reports of any spirits in the castle (I always ask on the way out so that I am not influenced during the visit). I was told that many people report seeing a spirit on the main staircase. Knowing I had taken several photographs, both looking both up and down this staircase, I left quite hopeful that I might have captured something there in the photographs, but unfortunately nothing unusual appeared in any of them. In the other photographs, I did however capture some unusual light anomalies.



The first photograph was taken within one of the tower rooms found in the inner courtyards walls. These tower rooms most likely provided defences for the castle, whilst also housing the guards. The room was very dark, with little natural light other than through the keyhole shaped gun hole. As mentioned before, I am not a great believer in orbs, but this particular picture stood out to me.





Most orbs are simply dust, or an insect reflecting light back from the flash of the camera, however, as can be seen above there is a strong light source behind the orb in this picture, which was the only light source in the room and this part of the room was the only section with any natural light as a result. I believe this would make it unlikely that any light would be reflected back at the camera, to make it stand out in such a manner.



The next picture shows the orb close up.





In this close up, the bars of the window grill can be clearly viewed through the orb. It appears to be completely transparent with no signs of any solid object within which could create a reflection from the flash. I remain unable to offer an explanation for this orb.



The second photograph with an unusual light anomaly was actually taken in the inner courtyard. To the bottom right hand side there is the door to the wine cellar and a small light can be seen;



The anomaly is more a streak of light rather than an orb, and appears to pass beyond the door opening, but on the inside of the building. I have considered various options, such as a mark on the camera lens, but this would not stop as perfectly as it does at the edge of the door opening. The only way this phenomenon could happen was if it was something inside passing the opening. Interestingly just within this opening is the bottom of one of the staircases. Perhaps this is the staircase where people claim to have witnessed the spirit.



I have since carried out some research on the subject but cannot find any specific stories relating to hauntings at Craigmillar Castle, but there are several other photographs of light anomalies and so it seems there may be something unusual there.





Pittenweem Tolbooth, Pittenweem, Fife


At the end of the high street in the picturesque fishing village of Pittenweem located in the East Neuk of Fife, stands the tolbooth tower, a four-storey building with a vaulted basement. The tower as it stands today, was built in the 1620s, although there was probably another building on the site previously.





Many people looking at the tower understandably assume it is just part of the adjoining church, but the tolbooth has experienced an unsavoury past which I first became aware of when one of my friends suggested going on the Weem Witch tour, organised by local historian, Leonard Low. Leonard wrote the book ‘The Weem Witch’ which tells the true story of the witch trials in Pittenweem during 1704, and the horrific brutality that took place within the walls of the tolbooth. Having then contacted Leonard, we arranged to attend the next tour.



The tolbooth itself is a tower with a steep spiral staircase and essentially is just one room per floor. Leonard’s tour was to tell the history of the events that took place in the tower, rather than a ‘ghost tour’, although we were warned to be careful with our electronic equipment such as cameras as batteries have the tendency to drain of power or cameras simply stop working all together when within the tower. Once we were inside, Leonard began to tell us what took place surrounding the 1704 witch trials.



At that time, Pittenweem was a wealthy town, but all that was to change. The men of the town had been sent to assist in the battle against the Jacobites with very few of them returning, and to add insult to injury most of the fishing fleet had been destroyed during a storm. The town authorities needed to raise sufficient funds to repair the damage caused to the harbour by the storm and rebuild the fishing boats, but with very few men left to work in the village and no income from fishing, this was proving impossible. But in March 1704, Patrick Morton, a sixteen year old blacksmith, presented the local authorities with an opportunity. After an argument with a wealthy local lady, Beatrix Laing, Morton found a bucket with water and fire coal on his door step. He fell ill shortly after, suffering from fits and accused Beatrix Laing of using witchcraft against him in retribution for their argument. Beatrix was arrested and subsequently brought to the tolbooth for questioning. The town council at the time met in the room on the first floor, which is where she was initially taken for the charges to be put to her, but after refusing to sign a confession, she was taken to the second floor, where the torture then began. Methods commonly used were ‘walking the witch’ whereby the accused would have a rope tied around them and they would constantly be walked round the room by the guards. Though the guards would take breaks and take turns to ‘walk the witch’, the accused was not allowed to rest, received no food or water and would often be walked for days at a time. If they slowed down, they would be struck with a bat, which would often have nails driven through it to rip their flesh from the body.



The most dreaded means of torture was however delivered by the Witch Prickers. The accused would first of all be stripped naked, and have every hair shaved from their body. They would then be examined for any unusual markings on the body, as the belief was that a witch would have a devils mark somewhere, which would confirm they had been touched by Satan. This mark could be anything, many of which occur naturally on the human body, such as moles or scars. It was however believed that the witch would feel no pain on the devils mark and it would not bleed, and so to test this theory the Witch Pricker would drive a needle or spike, several inches long, directly into the mark. If the accused showed any signs of pain, this was taken as evidence that it was not a devils mark that had been found, and the examination would therefore continue. If by some miracle, the accused managed not to show their pain, they were considered a witch and sent for execution regardless.



If, after every blemish on the body had been tested and the devils mark had still not been found, rather than consider the accused to be proven innocent, it was instead assumed the mark must be hidden somewhere under the skin. The pricker would then start to drive his needle into every inch of the body of the accused, looking for a spot where they felt absolutely no pain. This process could take several days and many of those accused simply gave up and admitted to witchcraft, just to end their agony. At the time, a confession obtained through torture was only accepted if it was backed up by a second confession provided at the free will of the accused. After the first confession, the accused would then be made comfortable, fed and treated well, before being asked to again sign the second confession. Many by this time had come to their senses and refused to do so, at which point they were taken back upstairs for the pricker to begin working on them again. It really was a hopeless situation and eventually most of the accused duly signed both confessions, but as well as confessing, they were asked to name other people in the village who they knew also practised witchcraft. In sheer desperation to stop the torture, each of the accused provided several names of others, normally friends or neighbours, who were then brought to the tolbooth and subjected to the same process until they also confessed.



Once the confessions had been obtained, the ‘witches’ were burned at the stake in an area just outside of the village. The authorities, led by the local minister, Patrick Cowper, then went on to seize all possessions of the accused, including their houses, and the family would be billed for their relatives time held in captivity, the pricker’s time and the wood for the fire used to burn them! The good fortune that the initial person accused was wealthy, meaning the people she was likely to name as also being witches, would also be wealthy, ensured a sizeable income for the concerned authorities.



By the time the trials ended in 1705, twenty-six people had been accused and of course tortured, and eighteen of them had been killed. The most horrific case was that of Janet Cornfoot, whom Laing had named. Janet became a ‘problem’ for Cowper as she had once spoken to a visiting official from the ruling City of Edinburgh regarding her treatment within the tolbooth. That night, she seemingly managed to escape through a second floor window. Bearing in mind she had been tortured for days, much speculation surrounds her escape as not only would she need to leap from a second floor window, she would have had to avoid the guards and overcome the town wall. It is thought she may have been released to instead ‘remove the problem’ with the Edinburgh officials for Cowper. She was however captured around ten miles away and quickly returned to Pittenweem. She was immediately met by an angry mob, who subjected her to beatings and dragged her down to the harbour where she was tied to a rope and repeatedly submerged in the ice cold water found there. She escaped into a nearby house, but the mob threatened the occupants of the house and pulled the door off its hinges. The door was put on top of Janet and stones were piled on top until the weight crushed her to death. To make sure she was dead, a sledge used to pull goods from the harbour up to the village was harshly run over her body several times.



After discovering the truth about the trials and writing ‘The Weem Witch’, Leonard started to run the tours of the tolbooth as a historical tour, but quite soon after, things started to happen in the tower. These have included people feeling nauseous and being forced to leave, people being scratched, unexplained sounds coming from empty areas of the tower and various sightings of figures. Several people have ended up requiring medical treatment following their experience in the tower.



I have visited the tower on several occasions, and as you can imagine I have never been disappointed. On the first visit, torches were handed out prior to us starting the tour, as it can be very dark inside, especially during the autumn and winter months. Whilst climbing the stairs to the second floor, the torch I had been given went from full brightness to having completely flat batteries within a few steps.



On another visit, while standing in the first floor room, everyone heard the sound of footsteps from the second floor room above us. When the tour reached this room, one visitor was simply too terrified to enter because of what she felt was within the room, and she had to be helped out of the tower. Later, when descending from the roof of the tower (which gives spectacular views) another member of the group saw a small girl stood on the stairs. Knowing she was not part of the group and fearful she had wandered into the tower by accident and may hurt herself on the dark, steep stairs, he shouted and ran down towards her, but she had vanished.



On another occasion Leonard allowed me to go into the tower whilst he waited for the rest of the group to arrive. The atmosphere is very different when you're in the tower alone, but I ventured up to the second floor room and began to take some photographs. My camera immediately drained of all of it's power (this was a new camera, not the same one used when I visited the Covenanter’s Prison and it was fully charged). I later discovered, after charging the camera again, that not only had it been drained of power, it had also been fully reset so I had to re-programme it.



I have managed to capture some unusual anomalies in some of the photographs taken in the tower. The photograph below was taken on the staircase and was one of several taken at the same time. Orbs can clearly be seen in the window, but orbs created by dust and insects are common in any photographs taken here. What caught my attention this time however, was they only showed up in this one photograph from a series of photographs taken.



A closer look at the orbs reveals many of them consist of different coloured rings:





I cannot explain what would cause these different colours to appear. One theory is that it is a fault within the camera and it is just dust, however, a characteristic of dust orbs is a thick ring that surrounds them and any inner rings will not be as thick. This is not the case in these orbs. In addition, the tolbooth tower and other associated sites are the only places I have captured images of these types of orbs, which would rule out a colour fault within my camera.



Below is another photograph showing a very similar orb:





A number of other orbs can be seen in this photograph, again most likely to be dust, but the coloured orb still stands out. If there were a fault within the camera, I would have expected all of the orbs to appear similar.



The last photograph I have to show of this type of orb, was actually taken at the window in the second floor room:





Although the colours are not as distinct in this orb, the larger internal rings can be seen clearly. This is the window it is claimed Janet Cornfoot escaped through, and the other unusual occurrence at this window is the dead butterflies seen on the windowsill. This is the only area in the whole tower they seem to gather and there is always a large number of them. Butterflies are thought to be a symbol of After Death Communication, as they represent the metamorphosis from the caterpillar to the beautiful, flying butterfly, which is symbolic of the change from our physical, human form to a free flying spirit, or alternatively an angel.



On the ground floor of the tower lies the prison, which was used to hold some of the accused witches, however, I have never experienced anything unusual or untoward in this room.



Leonard reports having a number of paranormal experiences in the tower himself, including seeing a full apparition of one of the spirits and also an elderly gentleman being captured in a photograph of one of the tour groups, despite there being no men in the group. A number of people have also witnessed the same spirit of the little girl in the tower, and Leonard has captured her voice before on a digital voice recorder. It is believed she was the daughter of one of the women who were accused of witchcraft and she had been visiting to give her mother food, when she became trapped in the tower and was killed by the guards.



Access to the tower is through organised tours solely operated by Leonard. They are well worth attending as Leonard has the ability to bring his historic knowledge to life. He is passionate about what happened to these innocent people and is running a campaign to have a memorial for them put up in the local area.





St Fillan’s Cave, Pittenweem


Lying a short walk away from the tolbooth tower is the entrance to St Fillan’s Cave. St Fillan was a 7th Century missionary who came to Scotland as a young man from Ireland. He travelled extensively around Scotland, but in his later years he lived as a hermit in the cave later named after him. He spent much of his time in the cave writing, and it was strongly believed at the time, that a magical light glowed from his arm as he wrote, allowing him to see whilst in the darkness of the cave. It is more likely, however, this was the light from a candle reflecting off his arm as he wrote, but as people could only see him from a distance, it appeared as though his arm was glowing.



St Fillan’s cave was later used by smugglers and was also loosely connected with the Pittenweem Witch Trials, with some of the accused being imprisoned here. Because of this, it is included as part of the Weem Witch tour as standard, although access can also be gained by collecting the key for the gate from the local shop.



The cave itself is entirely pitch black, and it is also another place where it is common for batteries in cameras to drain. Once you have entered the cave, there is a fairly steep slope down, before it opens up to the main area. An alter remains in the main cave, and weddings can legally still be held there, although the cave is small and damp.



I have visited the cave on several occasions and in most instances I have felt nothing out of the ordinary, even when I ventured into the cave alone with no lights on. However, the last time I visited, the atmosphere felt somewhat different. People within the group reported hearing a knocking noise, and one visitor found that when taking a photograph, the face recognition feature on their camera activated, indicating there was a face present, even though no one else was in the shot.



I captured the following picture myself:





Although quite small, it is the same style of orb that I repeatedly have showing up in photographs in the tolbooth tower, with the characteristic red outer ring and multi-coloured inner rings.





Slaines Castle, Aberdeenshire


Just North of the coastal village of Cruden Bay stands Slaines Castle. It was built for Frances Hay, the 9th Earl of Errol sometime after 1597 to replace the original Slaines Castle, which had stood approximately 8km away but was later destroyed in 1594.



Over the following centuries the castle was modified and extended on a number of occasions, and in the 1830s it was remodelled in the Scots Baronial style. In 1913 the 20th Earl of Errol sold the castle to a wealthy shipping magnate, who let the property out to tenants for a short while. In 1925 the roof was completely removed to avoid paying taxes on the property, and it has slowly deteriorated since then to its present, ruinous condition.



The castle has strong connections with Bram Stoker, who visited both Cruden Bay and possibly Slaines Castle on several occasions. It is said the castle was actually the inspiration for his world famous novel ‘Dracula’ and many people believe that the original manuscript contained the ‘Dementer’, the ship that carried Dracula to the UK, running aground at Cruden Bay. This is said to have been changed to Whitley Bay as the town would be more recognisable to the readers.



My initial visit to the property was inspired by the connection with the Dracula story. Every part of the castle is open to explore, although I would warn you that in certain parts caution is required. The castle is vast and the views are spectacular, thus it is easy to spend a lot of time here (when the weather is good). When browsing my many photographs later on, something caught my eye in the following photo:





This photograph was taken at some distance from the castle showing the rear entrance, but there appeared to be something in the opening to the right hand side of the archway. The following photograph is a close up of that area, lightened up for ease of visibility.





Unfortunately due to the distance and the lower quality camera used in this instance, the clarity is not the best at this level, however, in the lower opening there does appear to stand a hooded figure dressed in a white robe. I take this figure to be a monk, who is looking downwards, hence the narrow black opening for the front of the hood.



However, in the opening on the first floor, two more figures can also be seen. One appears to be seated to the right of the opening with another standing directly to his left. They appear out of scale with the monk, but they would be more proportionate if they were positioned further back in the room. I would also add the monk figure is actually extraordinarily tall.



I have returned to the castle since this photograph was taken and have tried to replicate my results but have been unable to do so. Given the sheer distance that the photograph was taken from the castle, I feel it is unlikely that there could have been any light reflection affecting the image. I have also considered the possibility that there may have been other visitors present for the first floor images, but no floor remains at this level and so it would be physically impossible for anyone to be up there.



The castle is an interesting place to visit and a number of long corridors remain, which despite being open to the harsh elements, do still have a eerie feel to them, which is enhanced by several doorways into various rooms being just off the corridors. The castle is said to be haunted by World War 2 soldiers and a phantom horse and carriage, but I have found no connection to the monk which appears in the photograph.



Access to the castle is completely unlimited, although there is a proposal in place to convert the old property into holiday apartments and so this could change at any time. There is no vehicular access, but there is a parking area on the A975 loop road with a path leading to the castle, or a tree lined route from Cruden Bay.





Direlton Castle, East Lothian


Around 19 miles from Edinburgh is the village of Direlton with its impressive castle. Construction of the castle first started around 1240 but it was extensively damaged during the Wars of Scottish Independence that happened between 1296 and 1357. Towards the end of the second war, John Haliburton took ownership of the castle and repaired and extended it, whilst still retaining what remained of the original castle which included the vaults, the chapel and the ‘prison and pit’. The walls were heightened and a new gatehouse was built, probably to improve the defences of the castle.



The castle remained in ownership of the Haliburton family until it was passed on to the Ruthven family. The castle was not to be the main residence for the Ruthvens, however they did carry out some further work to the castle, creating the new Ruthven Lodging, laying out the gardens and building a dovecot.



During the third English Civil war, the castle was primarily used by a band of moss troopers, essentially an army of ‘bandits’ made up mainly from former soldiers, who fought against the English army, led by Oliver Cromwell, when they invaded Southern Scotland in 1650. Cromwell sent around sixteen hundred troops to take the castle and the leader of the moss troopers was hanged from the castles walls. Cromwell had the castle extensively damaged to make it beyond military use and prevent it from being used against him again and, other than a short period of use as a military hospital, the castle was not occupied again.



In 1663, John Nisbet purchased the castle and created the gardens and bowling green which remain within the grounds today, but the castle was left to continue to deteriorate. In the 1920s the castle and gardens were passed onto Historic Scotland who presently continue to maintain the property, but have not restored it.



When I visited the property I had very little prior knowledge of the castle other than the prison and pit, which is a two storey prison with the ground level comprising of a large room with a fireplace where prisoners of a higher class were held and a pit beneath, cut into the stone, where the lower class prisoners were thrown. This area has an uncomfortable feeling, but nothing showed up in any of the photographs I took.



Much of the remainder of the castle remains accessible and it is certainly an interesting place to explore. When leaving, I once again asked the guide about any ghost stories, but was advised there was none that he was aware of. I must admit I was a bit surprised by this as, given the castles history, I expected it to be haunted. I did however find something interesting in one of my photographs.



The following picture was taken at the entrance to the castle, looking across the access bridge where the drawbridge once stood and through the gatehouse.





I felt drawn to the openings on the right side, particularly to the dome at the top, and zooming in on this opening revealed the following:





There appears to be a face staring out of the opening. The only logical explanation I could think of is that there was something reflecting the sunlight, and so I returned to the castle at a later date to check the area once again, and to see whether it was possible to access this level. Even if there were no public access, as that would not rule out the possibility of someone else being there as there may be staff access. The dome is actually at the top of the kitchen, which is accessed at the first floor level but has a ceiling height of over two storeys. However, looking at older floor plans of the castle, it would appear that the kitchen was once only found on the second floor, and it was later moved down to the first floor and the room opened up to create the existing two storey high room. It would therefore have been impossible for anyone to have been standing at this level of the castle when the photograph was taken as there is no floor, but in the past when the kitchen was at this level, it would have been possible for someone to be looking out from the window. Whether this is the face of a former inhabitant from times gone by, is something I cannot say with any degree of certainty, but with nothing physical to have reflected the light, I equally cannot rule it out.





Scottish Fisheries Museum , Fife

The Fisheries Museum is situated in the coastal town of Anstruther, Fife. It was opened up in 1969 by means of converting a number of buildings surrounding a central courtyard, and later extending them to include a number of adjoining buildings including a boatyard, cooperage and smoke house, resulting in a large number of now inter-connected buildings.



The main buildings date from the 16th century, although the central courtyard has even earlier connections to the fishing industry. Many of the properties were originally houses which were occupied by local fishermen, but also include the Abbots Lodging, used by the Abbot of Balmerino during various pilgrimages to the Isle of May. The site used to include a small chapel, but following the building falling into a state of disrepair, it was later dismantled in the late 19th Century.



The museum is extensive and shows the vast history of the living and working conditions for those working in the fishing industry and it also includes a number of vessels and a workshop. With over 400 years of history relating to the fishing industry, it is not surprising that the premises are reported to be haunted with staff and visitors witnessing noises, footsteps and, at one of the boats, a shadowy figure.



One of the incidents relates to a building which was set up as a former fisherman’s cottage, with the living accommodation on the ground floor and a store on the first floor. While work was being carried out on the building, some items were removed, including a pair of old boots. It's said that numerous unusual occurrences then happened in the building, including items being moved around and loud foot steps being heard. The boots were returned and the occurrences subsequently stopped.



A figure is often reported around a large boat called ‘Research’. Built in 1903, the boat is the sole remaining herring drifter of its type that was once used for herring fishing in the Moray Firth. After being out of use for nearly 11 years, the boat was brought to Anstruther Fisheries Museum in 1979 where it has been gradually restored since and at 24 meters in length, the boat now dominates the display room it is situated in. The shadowy figure has been seen moving about both inside and the outside of the boat, but it is not clear who he is.



Another common occurrence within the museum is the distinct smell of pipe smoke. No smoking is permitted within the buildings, however, looking at the numerous old photographs around the premises, many of them show fishermen smoking pipes, and so it clearly happened a lot in the past.



My visit to the Fisheries Museum was as part of an overnight paranormal investigation, and it was certainly an interesting night! Prior to my visit, the only haunting I was aware of in the museum, was the old story relating to the boots. Initially we had a walk through the buildings accompanied by our psychic medium. She initially picked up a connection with monks, which the staff confirmed was in fact correct. I believe this was connected with the Abbot of Balmerino. She also picked up on the figure at the ‘Research’ and advised us that she believed he was possibly painting the vessel, which would explain why the figure is seen moving around the boat a lot. When we reached the fisherman’s cottage, she further picked up on noises and footsteps being a common occurrence in the storeroom. She described the footsteps as being heavy, as though it was somebody wearing large, old-fashioned boots. Many sceptics would consider there to be nothing out of the ordinary so far, as the information is freely available from other sources. However, what added credibility for me at that stage, was someone suggested whether the boots hanging up in the room could be related, so she held them to see if she picked up any energy from them, and she stated the boots were not related to the room in any way, and were added later. If she had known the story before, it would be easy to state they were connected, but by stating they weren’t it raised questions about the whole story.



During the investigations, a lot of personal information was provided via the Ouija board for verification, and some details specific to a former fisherman were also provided. Several figures were seen, including an old lady, and I witnessed, again, a shadowy figure in the ground floor room of the fisherman’s cottage, which was seen by everyone in the group.



I took a number of photographs on the night, including the one found below, which shows an unusual light or mist and shadow at the ‘Research’. Could this be somehow connected with the shadowy figure frequently seen?





In my opinion, the Fisheries Museum has provided me with the most evidence of paranormal activity to date.





St Andrews , Fife

It would be difficult not to mention St Andrews in a book covering reported hauntings in Scotland. The town, with its famous golf courses, cathedral and university has far more than it’s fair share of haunted locations.



Many have heard of the white lady, who is reported to be seen walking within the cathedral grounds during the stormy nights. Sightings of a lady dressed in white date back over 200 years, however the story of the haunted tower is much less known, despite it’s connection to the white lady. The tower is one of the remaining defensive towers built into the walls of the cathedral and in 1868, while carrying out routine repairs, the stonemasons broke into an inner chamber where they found a number of coffins, one was open and contained the well preserved body of a woman wearing a white dress and gloves.



As a child I was once told a story that if you put your hands through the side gate to the cathedral, which is situated on the path from the East Scores to the harbour, that you would in turn feel a pair of cold, leather clad hands grip your hands. I was not aware of the story of the haunted tower at that point, but the gate is very close to the tower indeed.



St Andrews castle is also known to be haunted by Cardinal Beaton, Archbishop of St Andrews. Beaton is reported to have been quite the unpopular man, favouring his relations with France over England. This added to the religious divide present in Scotland at the time, as the alliance with France would maintain the Catholic faith, whereas many felt that the very young Mary Queen of Scots offered hope of closer relations with Henry 8th Protestant England through marriage with his young son.



Instead Beaton asserted his allegiance to France, and the English subsequently invaded Scotland. Although this invasion increased support for the alliance with France, many blamed Beaton for unnecessarily causing the invasion. Perhaps to divert attention, Beaton turned on the Protestant supporters and arranged for a well-known Protestant preacher, George Wishart to be arrested and tried for heresy. Wishart was held in the castle’s battle dungeon before being convicted at a show trial and sentenced to his death. On March 1st 1546, he was burned at the stake outside of St Andrews castle, as Beaton watched from a castle window. This was however to be the downfall for Beaton, as George Wishart had many supporters, some of whom under the guise of being stone masons gained entry to the castle on the morning of 29th May 1546 and dragged Beaton from his bed chambers before beating, stabbing and mutilating him. His body was then hung from the window where he had watched George Wishart burn. It is claimed Cardinal Beaton can still be seen walking the grounds of the castle, and on certain nights his body can still be seen hanging from the window.





The Mine and Counter Mine, St Andrews Castle


Following the death of Cardinal Beaton, the group of Protestants took their refuge in the castle, and a year long siege soon followed, during which the attacking forces tried to mine their way into the castle. This was no easy task as the mine had to be cut deep enough both to pass below the castles moat, and cut through solid rock. The Protestants learned of the mine and began to dig a counter mine, with the sole intention to meet in the mines and launch a surprise attack. There is evidence of two false starts for the counter mine, before they finally met the mine. It is not clear what happened within these tunnels. They certainly did not end the siege here, as that was later ended by a bombardment from French ships. It does seem the two tunnels did finally meet, with the counter mine ending with a steep drop down into the attacker’s mine, probably where the ground gave way due to the counter mine being dug over the attacker’s mine, and some report that the Protestant defenders fought back the invaders, but I have not been able to find any definite record of what happened inside, though I am certain people died in there, whether digging the tunnels or in the ensuing fight afterwards.



The mystery has always attracted me to the mines and I have visited them on numerous occasions. The counter mine is small, dark and damp, but once you descend into the attacker’s mine (now accessed via a metal stair case) this opens into a far larger area. With little information about what happened in the mines, there are no stories of them being haunted, that I am aware of. They are however extremely atmospheric and during a recent visit, I could not shake the intrepid feeling of being followed as I left. When I was close to the exit, I took a number of photographs looking back down the tunnel, one of which is shown below.





Two orbs are clearly visible in the photograph. The damp and dark atmosphere again make it very unlikely for these orbs to be dust or insects, and while droplets of water do occur, I had not felt any fall during my time down the tunnels and so I would find it strange for two to show up now whilst taking the photograph. A close up of the orbs is below:





Both orbs are quite different in appearance, with the one at the top of the picture appearing denser with a red outer ring. My own feeling is that this orb in particular is very unusual in appearance and I remain convinced there is ‘something’ down these tunnels.



St Andrews castle is operated by Historic Scotland and entry details can be obtained at their website.





St Salvator’s/Patrick Hamilton, St Andrews


The Chapel of St Salvator stands on North Street, St Andrews and is an impressive example of old Scottish Gothic architecture.



Dating from 1450, the building was originally built as part of St Salvator’s college, and is now a part of St Andrews University. One of the most impressive features of the building is the college tower, which is pictured above. The chapel remains very much part of the University life in St Andrews; however, on the cobblestones outside is an area the students tend to avoid.



Patrick Hamilton was a Scottish Protestant in the 16th Century. Hamilton preached around Europe before finally returning to Scotland and becoming a member of St Leonards College in St Andrews, where he continued his preaching and began to build himself a following. This brought him to the attention of James Beaton, the uncle of Cardinal Beaton and the Archbishop of St Andrews, and during early 1527, Beaton ordered that Hamilton was to be tried for heresy. Hamilton fled to Germany, but returned to Scotland later that same year to continue with his preaching. Beaton invited him to St Andrews and despite successfully predicting it would lead to his death, Hamilton accepted. Beaton allowed him to continue his preaching for a short while before then having him arrested, tried and convicted. On February 29th, 1528, Patrick Hamilton, at the mere age of just 24, was burned at the stake outside the college tower of St Salvators.



As barbaric as being burned at the stake is, Hamilton’s death was not quick nor was it painless. A bag of gunpowder was placed in the woodpile to initially ignite the kindling, but when it exploded it failed to do so, and only succeeded in causing minor burns to Hamilton’s face and hands. Two more attempts were made, but on each occasion the gunpowder only caused more burns to Hamilton and in turn failed to light the fire. Realising the wood was still wet, dry wood was eventually brought and the fire was successfully ignited, but it is said that it took more than six hours from when Hamilton was brought to the fire, for him to finally succumb to the flames. In his final moments, he is said to have held his hand up to the sky and proclaimed, “How long, O Lord, shall darkness overwhelm this realm? How long wilt thou suffer this tyranny of men? Lord Jesus, receive my spirit”. His death is described as being so powerful, that his face was scorched into the stonework of the chapel tower when his spirit left his body and, to this day, the face can still be seen just a few rows of stones above the top of the arch.





The spot where Patrick Hamilton was burned is marked by cobbles showing his initials.





Although the area is not haunted in the traditional sense, it is considered to be bad luck by the students to stand on these initials, and a sure sign they will fail their degree if they do so.



Both the face on the college tower and the initials, can be viewed freely on North Street, St Andrews.





Magus Muir, Near St Andrews


A short distance outside of St Andrews, close to the village of Strathkinness lies a natural woodland called Magus Muir. Within these woods stands a single stone pyramid, a monument to Archbishop James Sharp.





Sharp was a Scottish minister who became the Archbishop of St Andrews in 1661. He had initially been supportive of the Presbyterian Church, but had changed his allegiance in private to the Episcopalian establishment, which was in support of the notion that local Christian Churches were to be governed solely by Bishops. He is thought to have known this would be the chosen settlement of the churches brought in by the return of King Charles II, and this may have played a part in him being made the Archbishop. Prior to his appointment, he had given off the impression to his colleagues that the King would support Presbyterianism and the signing of the Covenant, filling them with dire hope, so much hope, that when in 1661 King Charles proclaimed the restoration of the Scottish Episcopacy, Sharp understandably became an unpopular figure amongst his peers.



Sharp then began a campaign against the Presbyterian Covenanters with a considerable level of brutality, which is probably best demonstrated in his treatment of the eleven prisoners who had surrendered on the promise of mercy. They were later told by Sharp that although they had been pardoned as soldiers, they were not acquitted as his subjects, following which he sentenced them to death with the instruction that their heads and right arms were to be cut off, with their heads then displayed on the city gates and their arms secured to the prison doors. Such was the levels of brutality; there were rumours circulating that Sharp had been visited by the Devil and was working under his influence.



On 3rd May, 1679, Sharp was returning to St Andrews from Edinburgh with his daughter, when the coach was suddenly stopped and then surrounded by a group of Covenanters at Magus Muir. Sharp was not initially the Covenanters intended target, they had been waiting for the sheriff of Cupar, but had also been tipped off that the Archbishop would be travelling to St Andrews. The Covenanters are said to have demanded that Sharp stepped out of the coach, as they did not wish to harm his daughter in any way, but when he refused this request, they shot and stabbed him before dragging him from the coach and killing him.



Those responsible were not held accountable for the murder, but instead five Covenanters who were taken as prisoners during the Battle of Bothwell Bridge in June 1679 and had played no part in the murder were charged. They were found guilty of concealing those responsible purely on the basis they were Covenanters and were sentenced to death. They were hanged at Magus Muir on 25th November 1679. Very close to Archbishop Sharp’s monument, there is a gravestone marking the graves of the Covenanters, which is surrounded by large stonewalls.





It is from Magus Muir that it is said Archbishop Sharp’s coach can still be seen, continuing its journey to St Andrews close to the Strathkinness Low Road on stormy nights. It is said the coach is an omen of death, and is a warning to those seeing it that either they or a close relative will soon pass.



I have visited Magus Muir many times, and it is an eerily quiet place. Despite being in a wood, there is almost no noise from birds or other animals and it is certainly not a place I would like to visit after dark.



Access to Magus Muir is from a small car park just outside Strathkinness. From the car park a path leads you through the woods and round to the monument. The graves are in the adjoining field.





City of Mystery


Is it possible that thousands of years ago an Egyptian princess visited Scotland and made the site where Edinburgh now stands her capital? In September 2009, mystic Uri Geller made a strange claim. He argued that an island in the Firth of Forth, known as ‘The Lamb’, had links to the ancient Egyptians and that treasure brought to Scotland by an Egyptian Princess called Scota, could be buried there. Whether or not ancient artefacts are hidden on this small island off the coast of North Berwick, Uri Geller brought to public attention a fact long hidden from the Scottish public. Edinburgh may have been founded by the same civilisation that built the pyramids. And Scotland might have been named after the Egyptian princess Scota. Although most historians do not accept the link, the belief has been long held in Scotland and was recorded as fact by writer Walter Bower, in the fifteenth century, in his book The Chronicles of Scotland. In recent years, whatever the official view, such ideas have received a boost from work carried out by scientists using the latest DNA technology, which has revealed that there is a significant genetic link between today’s inhabitants of Scotland and people of the Near East. That by no means proves that Scotland was colonised by Egyptians and may simply point to migration across Europe thousands of years ago. It is intriguing, nonetheless, especially when other facts are considered.

To add to the mystery there is evidence that the Picts, who at one time were the ruling tribe in Scotland, may have their origin in the land of Scythia, an ancient country bordering the Middle East. Furthermore, traces of Cornish tin in Egyptian-made objects points to the fact that, thousands of years ago, trading was taking place right across the Mediterranean Sea and would surely have included Scotland. There are certainly names across Scotland which suggest an Egyptian influence. There is the River Isis, near Blairgowrie, for one. Isis was, of course, one of the key goddesses in the religion of the Ancient Egyptians. A river bearing her name shows that a cult of Isis was at one time active in the area, and that surely cannot have been an isolated event. Over the years other ancient names, which once existed, have simply been overlaid by newer ones. Some have survived though. The River Nith in Dumfriesshire bears close resemblance to the name of an Egyptian goddess and, interestingly, there was at least one queen of Ancient Egypt called Neith. A pyramid, still standing, marks her burial place.

More proof of a link with Scotland comes in the shape of faience beads, which have been shown to be identical to those found on necklaces from Amarna, the ancient Egyptian city built by the Pharaoh Akhenaten, and dating to 1350 BC. They have been found in several locations across Scotland. In addition a pear-shaped white glass bead discovered near Arbroath was similar to beads from the time of the eighteenth Egyptian dynasty, around three thousand years ago. It is also incredible but true that, in 1937, the remains of three Egyptian boats were discovered beneath centuries of mud in the Humber Estuary at North Ferriby, only a comparatively short journey from the Lothian coast. It is to be wondered what else waits to be discovered about this long-hidden connection. It all suggests that Ancient Egypt and Scotland might well have been known to each other and that the alleged ‘myth’ of this contact might have some basis in fact.

There is another strange link to the capital. The ‘Blue Blanket’ has long been a symbol of Edinburgh. Up to the 1970s, a pub called the ‘Blue Blanket’ stood in the heart of the Royal Mile testifying to its enduring appeal. Blue rather than green was the traditional Scottish symbol of the ‘other world’, of the mystic realms, as in the ‘Blue men of the Minch’, the mythical sea creatures who dwelt in the depths of the sea. So where did this tradition come from? The usual account tells us that, in 1482, King James III was being held prisoner in Edinburgh Castle. The citizens of the capital came out to support him and helped free the king. As a gesture of thanks James granted the trades people of the city the right to display a banner, which was to be used when rallying the citizens of Edinburgh to defend the capital. This banner came to be called the ‘Blue Blanket’. However, some have cast doubt on this traditional tale suggesting that the banner had, in fact, a far older pedigree and had been taken to the Holy Land during the Crusades. This might suggest that James had given the city a banner which already had an ancient history, and that the banner was already seen as having a mystical association.

But why the name and how did it link to the monarchy? A clue may be found in the Berlin Museum. Displayed there is an inscribed stone, called a ‘stela’, on which is carved the figures of two rulers, one of whom is wearing what is known as the ‘Blue crown’. One of the carvings has been identified as Akenhaten and the other as his wife Nefertiti. It was their daughter, the legendary Scota, who allegedly came to Scotland. So did Scota bring the belief in the mystical significance of the colour blue to Edinburgh? It’s a tantalising thought and there’s no doubt that much remains to be unearthed about our connection with the ancient Egyptians.

Indeed other aspects of the city are connected to the ancient world if the writer Comyns Beaumont is to be believed. According to Beaumont, who wrote two detailed books on the subject, archaeologists have misunderstood ancient history. He argued — after extensive research of ancient biblical texts, Greek writings and Pictish carved stones among others — that the ancient Greeks and Phoenicians lived not in the Mediterranean, but in Scotland. Mount Olympus was not located in Greece, but was actually Ben Nevis.

His ideas might seem hard to swallow, but recent evidence has emerged which may provide some support for his theories. Research by linguistic experts has identified a lost language of Scotland. It appears that in addition to Pictish and Gaelic there existed, thousands of years ago, a third language, few traces of which remain. But it was a language which experts believe was similar to that spoken in Phoenicia, the ancient biblical land occupying the area where modern-day Israel and the Lebanon now stand. This discovery did not emerge till many years after Beaumont published his work in the 1940s. In Beaumont’s mind, Edinburgh occupied pride of place. It was, in fact, the true Jerusalem as described in the Bible; the very place where Jesus walked and was crucified. He identified Arthur’s Seat as the actual Mount of Olives, the hill so strongly linked in the Bible to the last year of Jesus’ mission. The biblical ‘City of Zion’ was, in his view, a fortress on the rock where Edinburgh Castle now stands, and ‘Joppa’ was the actual port of the same name recorded in the Old Testament. According to Beaumont, a natural catastrophe only a few thousand years ago, a comet strike he suggested, had forced the ‘Greeks’ and ‘Phoenicians’ to flee from Scotland and settle in the Mediterranean. So Jerusalem, which had really been Edinburgh, became linked instead to the biblical land of Israel. Whatever the reality, Beaumont’s ideas are a testament to the hold that the ‘magic’ of Edinburgh can have on an individual’s imagination.





Arthur’s Seat – the mystic heart of Edinburgh where strange miniature coffins were hidden underground, maybe to cast a Satanic spell.

Beaumont seemed unaware of it, but there was an ancient tradition that connected Edinburgh and Jerusalem. Legend claimed that the capital’s ‘City Guard’, a group which patrolled the ‘Old Town’ and maintained law and order, were present in Jerusalem at the time Jesus was crucified. At that time they took from the Temple an original portrait of King Solomon for safekeeping. The painting, if it ever existed, is long gone and we need not take this story at face value, but it does suggest that there was a belief that the Holy Land and Scotland’s capital city were bound by a special relationship. And that need not appear as fanciful as it seems. Recent investigation by Edinburgh’s Gordon Strachan, detailed in Jesus the Master Builder, has suggested that Jesus may have visited Scotland and discussed religious matters with the Druids. There is even a tradition that Jesus was born in Scotland and was taken to the ‘Holy Land’ as a child. Whatever the truth, it suggests a hidden link connecting Scotland to biblical events with which it was long believed we had no involvement.

But how is it that the site where Edinburgh now stands has always been seen as a place of such importance? Was there a special aura that our ancestors associated with this part of Scotland, located between the Pentland Hills and the Firth of Forth? A clue may be found in Rosslyn Chapel. On its own Rosslyn Chapel has earned a reputation that ranks it as one of the world’s key mystery sites. But enigmatic as it is, I would argue that it is but one part of a wider mystery that takes in a range of strange locations stretching right across the city, and which, in addition, form an interlocking puzzle. However, we will take Rosslyn Chapel as a starting point. The strange figures which adorn the ceiling and pillars and its links to both the Knights Templar and Freemasons have encouraged wide speculation, but little has been said about a number of lesser-known aspects of the chapel. For centuries before the building was erected the area was known as a place where strange lights and objects appeared. As early as the sixth century ad, the mystic and religious leader St Mungo visited the area and, indeed, a well named after him, which was believed to cure the sick, existed in nearby Penicuik. Mungo, who later became the patron saint of Glasgow, was a man who was believed to posses supernatural powers and although he is now linked more to Scotland’s west coast he was in fact the son of a Lothian princess who miraculously survived attempts to drown her in the Firth of Forth. Mungo’s visits to Rosslyn show that long before the chapel existed this location was seen as having some type of mystical attraction.

Furthermore, can it just be coincidence that Rosslyn Chapel was built within sight of the Pentland Hills? It has always struck me as odd, however, that though several writers have discussed the mysteries of the chapel no one has considered previously the strange aura that exists around the Pentlands. I would go as far as to suggest that Edinburgh and sites such as Rosslyn Chapel were chosen because of their proximity to these hills. In my view, they are the most sacred of the locations in this area. There is some support for this from the very word ‘Pentland’ which, according to Peter Drummond’s Scottish Hill Names, was coined during the twelfth century to describe the hills. It may actually be an amalgamation of the words ‘pen’ and ‘llan’ meaning the heights above enclosed land and a church. From early times, it seems, the Pentland Hills and the future site of Rosslyn Chapel were closely linked.

The Pentlands, which form an imposing backdrop, both spiritually and physically, to the capital, have been the source of many strange events for centuries, including bizarre balls of light which move and hover and seem to be driven by some weird intelligence. Such lights continue to appear. In the Autumn of 1989, at High Camilty, a shining white light was seen hovering over a field close to an isolated house. It had first been observed travelling down the slopes of the Pentlands at speed, but stopped for several minutes as if deciding where to go next. It then moved towards the house at about tree height and came within two hundred yards of the bedroom window, where the family stood watching, before it halted then slowly retreated. But this was by no means an isolated incident and strange lights, moving both slowly and rapidly, have been reported in this area on many occasions.

But do the Pentland Hills hold an even stranger secret which explains why our ancestors found this area such a spiritual heartland? It’s an incredible fact that the outline of the Pentland Hills, when viewed from certain areas with the sun behind them, form the shape of an enormous goddess figure. The best time to witness this strange phenomenon is during the period of the winter solstice in December. It has been suggested that the hills were deliberately modified to achieve this effect, but it may be no more than simply the chance of nature. Such a phenomenon is rare, but has been noted at other spots in Scotland. The Isle of Skye springs to mind. And the mysterious shape formed by the Pentland Hills might fit well with the idea of the Cailleach, the ancient Celtic goddess of winter who represents cold, darkness and death. The Cailleach, according to legend, turns to rock when summer comes and the possibility that the Pentland Hills were seen as representing the Cailleach is tantalising. When Christianity arrived the Cailleach was transformed into St Bridget, the protector of the harvest, and the polar opposite of the pagan Pentland goddess.

The capital has, as might be guessed, been host to a number of strange sects. One of these was known as the ‘Sweet Singers’ although the name belies their beliefs. They were convinced that Edinburgh was destined to explode in a firestorm sent down from heaven and be consumed in the same way as Sodom and Gomorrah. Even odder is the fact that this was an all-female group who abandoned their children and husbands to their fate while they set out for a safe haven from which to watch the destruction of the city. The most interesting aspect, however, is that the place of sanctuary they chose was located on the Pentland Hills, although the exact site is unknown. It seems that the hills had a mystic significance for this group of believers and that they were convinced that staying on the Pentlands would save them from the fury that was about to engulf their fellow citizens. The disaster, of course, did not materialise and the women were eventually rounded up and returned home. But the fact that it was a female cult coupled with the strange form of the Pentland goddess suggests that they were either pulled unconsciously towards the Pentlands or had realised the significance of them for themselves. Is this further evidence that this area could have been, at one time, the site of the worship of a female goddess? The mystic Cailleach?

It’s certainly strange that a Christian chapel like Rosslyn should lie almost in the shadow of a range of hills which may have been dedicated to a pagan goddess. But then Rosslyn is no ordinary place, as the many strange figures carved on its walls and ceilings testify. How is it that elaborate stone effigies of the Green Man, a pagan god of nature, are represented in this Christian sanctuary; one where it is said the Holy Grail, the ultimate Christian symbol, allegedly lies buried? In May 2006, yet another claim emerged about supposed secrets contained within the chapel. It was said that a scan of the crypt, carried out as far back as the 1980s, revealed eighteen graves. Sixteen of the bodies interred there had been buried in full armour which suggested they might be ‘of royal blood’. It was also discovered that the area where the bodies had been buried had been covered with a layer of sand. It was argued that objects from King Solomon’s temple had been hidden there and covered over to prevent anyone finding them. This followed the revelation that a metal detector had located an object, which some suggested had the appearance of a chalice, inside the famous ‘apprentice pillar’, the elaborately decorated buttress which dominates the interior of the chapel so spectacularly.

Rosslyn has become a sacred icon of such standing that even the head of Christ is alleged to have been buried there. But a UFO? Some have suggested that this is, in fact, the real secret of Rosslyn. That either an alien craft or information from alien visitors was hidden aeons ago beneath the ground on which the chapel now stands. This bold assertion could, of course, only be proved if, or when, the whole area is excavated. As this is unlikely to happen it has to be agreed that this can only rank as wide speculation, but may have its origins in what is undeniably true — that the balls of light, which are often seen in the area, have frequently been observed disappearing into the earth itself.

However, this is unlikely to have any connection to the strange underground tunnels that stretch from Rosslyn across the Esk Valley. There appears to be a sophisticated tunnel complex here, but no clear explanation as to what its purpose might have been. Some have linked the tunnels to claims that many sacred artefacts lie hidden in the area. But, whether or not these have any substance, it’s clear that as far as these objects are concerned they are supposed to lie beneath the chapel itself. These strange tunnels appear to have a quite separate function and, I would suggest, may pre-date the construction of the chapel. It is possible that they were made for, and were used in, some type of mystic ceremonies. There’s little doubt that in the early years of its development Christianity was very much mixed up with pagan beliefs. One key aspect of Druidism, for example, was the belief that the mystic and sacred realms existed below ground and could be visited through tunnels. Perhaps this offers an explanation for the existence of this mysterious cave system.

However, strange tunnels are not only, or even mainly, located round Rosslyn Chapel. There are several sites, even within the heart of the city, where tunnels exist and for which there is no obvious explanation. ‘Gilmerton Cove’ is one such place. As far back as 1845, as detailed in The Third Statistical Account, a national survey compiled by the Church of Scotland, there were doubts over the cave’s history. At that time the authors wrote:



There is at Gilmerton a singular cave, dug out of solid rocks. It contains several apartments and was finished in 1724 by an eccentric inhabitant of that place after five years hard labour. [He] lived with his family and carried on his occupation as a smith in the place till 1753.



The smith in question was George Paterson. As the world grew increasing rational and rejected mysticism, Gilmerton Cove was seen as nothing more than the creation of a local eccentric. However, it is worth noting that the lands on which the cave lay were at one time owned by the St Clairs; the family that built the mystical temple now famous as Rosslyn Chapel.

It may be true that the cave was used and extended by Paterson, but other evidence suggests that it dates from a much earlier period. It would seem unlikely that Paterson would have made use of anything other than an existing structure, though he may well have adapted it for his own purposes. Rumours and myths have attached themselves to the site. One is that it was used by the Knights Templar. Unless evidence emerges from somewhere then this can only remain as speculation, though it is true that the Templars did make use of this type of place to carry out secret rituals. The Templars have well-documented links to Rosslyn Chapel and it’s possible that the cave system might have been used for initiation ceremonies of some kind. Freemasons may also have met there and, as the St Clairs at one time owned the land and have been linked to both organisations, it is possible that Gilmerton Cove did serve as a secret gathering place.

It has also been claimed that a tunnel system linked Gilmerton Cove to Craigmillar Castle. There may be some truth in this though there has been no attempt to locate this underground complex and, therefore, at the moment it can be no more than an unproven legend. However, it is certainly true that this area did have mystical links. St Catherine’s Well close by, was famous for its power to heal. It was claimed that many miraculous cures occurred there, and the waters were believed to be especially effective in dealing with skin diseases. An annual procession was made to the well in honour of St Catherine and it was so highly prized that even as protestant a monarch as James VI visited it in 1617, and ordered the well to be enclosed properly and protected.

The fascination with constructing caves and tunnels in order to engage in bizarre secret rituals continued well into the eighteenth century. Sir John Clerk of Penicuik, who had an obsession with the beliefs of the ancient world, had a shaft dug into the side of a hill on his estate. Half way down the tunnel he constructed a small room carved out of solid rock. Here, with the walls decorated with strange designs, Clerk and a group of initiates took part in rituals of some kind. Intriguingly, Clerk was a close friend of James St Clair and, in 1736, encouraged him to carry out repairs to Rosslyn Chapel after it had been damaged by mob violence some fifty years before. Clerk was a prominent freemason and 1736 was also the year that the Freemasons’ Grand Lodge of Scotland was founded.

Strange unexplained tunnels continue to be discovered. In March 2009, tramworkers revealed three mysterious underground chambers on Princes Street, thought to date from the eighteenth century, although their use is still unknown. It’s said that more vaults have been discovered beneath the North and South Bridge, and I have been assured on several occasions that a tunnel exists linking Calton Hill to Arthur’s Seat; one that runs beneath the site of the present Scottish parliament.

Like Rome, Edinburgh is said to have been built on seven hills and each site can claim to be linked to paranormal events. Arthur’s Seat has certainly been a focus for many bizarre incidents stretching from distant centuries down to the present day. But was ‘Arthur’s Seat’ so named because of a link to the legendary king? Certainly Edinburgh and the surrounding area can boast several sites with a historical connection, whether real or mythical, to Arthur. The name ‘Arthur’s Seat’ need not be taken to imply that Arthur lived in the area, although one legend holds that Arthur was buried here and will one day return. Similar legends connect Arthur to areas not too far away. The Eildon Hills also boasts a tradition that King Arthur lies in a grave surrounded by his knights. It may be that what we are talking about is an idea, a religious symbolism that focused on particular hill sites because of ceremonies or long-standing myths associated with them. One key fact that has become clear in recent years is that Arthur was linked to the Scottish lowlands as strongly as with the south of England or Wales. And his key advisor, the man possessed of supernatural powers, Merlin, is more strongly associated with the Scottish lowlands than elsewhere in Britain.

Other evidence has suggested that Arthur was active in the area. There’s the well-known ‘Arthur’s o’en’ in nearby Stenhousemuir; an oval, stone-built building, now demolished, said to have been built in this shape to house King Arthur’s famous round table. And to add to that, Camelon in Falkirk is one of the sites suggested for the great battle of the same name, one of the six battles fought by Arthur against the invading Angles and Saxons. As has been pointed out by writer Alistair Moffat, several sites in the Borders have an Arthurian association and Merlin is also said to have died and been buried at Drumelzier. Put together with the Edinburgh links it does suggest that Arthur was strongly associated with an area extending down from the Firth of Forth which had Edinburgh as its focus.

It has even been suggested that the final resting place of King Arthur, the Avalon of legend, was located in the Firth of Forth on the Isle of May. Whether or not King Arthur really existed may be irrelevant in this respect. It is certainly possible that these legends arose around Edinburgh because the area had such a strong mystical aura. It was a place which seemed to act as a bridge between this world and other worlds.

Although the legends surrounding King Arthur exercised a powerful influence on the minds of our ancestors it is unlikely to have been a factor leading the Knights Templar to set up a base in Edinburgh, following their expulsion from France in 1307. It’s more likely to have been a recognition that the area possessed a mystical atmosphere, a place where their secret rituals, damned as blasphemy in the rest of Europe, would blend into the aura and they could practise their beliefs without disturbance. It was maybe at this time that the close links between the St Clair family and the Knights Templar began to develop. Certainly, they have become entwined in tradition and both are linked to mystical sites across the city.

In December 1998, Edinburgh was hit by a severe storm and one casualty was an ancient sycamore tree which stood in Corstorphine. There were several strange legends linked to the tree. It was said to have been planted at the same time as building began on Rosslyn Chapel. This would have made it some five hundred years old which, on the face of it, appears unlikely. The normal life span for a sycamore tree is far less. However, there is at least a symbolic link between the two sites, as the St Clair family who built Rosslyn and the Forrester clan who owned areas of Corstorphine were, it is said, closely associated. This might explain one of the legends linked to the ancient sycamore. It is said that a hoard owned by the Knights Templar is buried beneath it, which is reminiscent of the claim that Templar treasure is buried beneath Rosslyn Chapel. It’s not quite clear why these two sites should be connected in this way. It is possible that the sycamore stands at a spot that was once regarded as sacred, though it’s a mystery why this should be the case.

However, the legend that a ‘white lady’ guards the spot and has appeared holding a sword dripping with blood indicates that there is a long tradition associated with the area, which pre-dates the growth of the sycamore. This materialisation of a white lady apparently defending the site, however, contrasts with a legend linked to Rosslyn that a ‘green lady’ will one day appear and reveal where Templar treasure is buried. White ladies are often linked to ancient wells, usually regarded as the haunt of spirits in ancient myth, and it is possible that, in the past a well once existed here or close by. In connection with this, it is interesting to note that, in folklore, a sycamore radiated energy of some kind that kept fairies at bay. There was also a tragic story linked to the Corstorphine sycamore. It’s said that a daughter of one of the Forrester lairds fell in love with a man her father regarded as unsuitable. She met her boyfriend beneath the sycamore and it was here that her father found them together and killed him. She died of a broken heart and her phantom now haunts the site. However, this may have been an explanation given by later generations to account for the appearance of unearthly spirits.

There are other links connecting the St Clairs of Rosslyn to the Knights Templars. South of the Meadows where the area now known as Sciennes developed, there once stood a monastery, that of St Catherine of Scienna, which was run by Dominican nuns and founded by Lady St Clair of Rosslyn. Opposite this site, across the Meadows, a chapel of the Knights Templar was set on a slight rise. It was known as ‘Mount Hooly’, which has been interpreted as a later corruption of ‘Holy Mount’. As far back as 1799, historian Hugo Arnot commented:



As the Knights professed to defend the holy mount and sepulchre, and to protect pilgrims resorting to it, this branch of them, in commemoration of the grand object of their order had bestowed on the site of the chapel the name of the ‘Holy Mount’. In digging the ground some time ago, several bodies were found there, buried cross-legged and having swords by their sides.



This raises a number of questions. Why was this site viewed as so sacred? Did it house some relic that was regarded as of such importance that it deserved the designation ‘Holy Mount?’ It may also be the case that there was a ‘holy way’ which stretched from the site of Rosslyn Chapel into the centre of the city, by way of the ‘Holy Mount’, and ended at the foot of the Royal Mile. It was here, with Arthur’s Seat as a backdrop, that a mystical incident took place which impacted on the history of a city and, indeed, on Scotland.

On 14 September 1128, King David I was holding his court in the Castle of Edinburgh. It was the day of the Feast of the Elevation of the Cross, but instead of passing the day in solemn observance David decided that he would rather go hunting. The area lying around the castle and towards Arthur’s Seat was heavily forested at this time and a favourite hunting ground for the king as it was full of game, including deer. The hunting party passed from the Castle down to the East, but when the hunters came below Salisbury Crags the king found himself separated from his courtiers. It is possible that at this point the king entered some mystical realm as he found himself confronted by an enormous white stag.

The king’s horse, startled, tried to gallop away, but the hart charged and threw the horse and rider to the ground wounding David in the thigh. The king, half-stunned, raised his arm to shield himself from a further thrust of the stag’s horns, but found that his hand clutched not antlers but a crucifix made from part of the very cross to which Jesus had been nailed. David kept a tight hold on the cross and the white stag gradually vanished before his eyes. Overwhelmed by this experience, the king returned to the castle and, to commemorate this strange event, decreed that Holyrood Abbey would be built on the spot where the pieces of the true cross had been placed in his hand. The Canongate coat of arms still shows the stag’s head with a cross between the horns, in remembrance of this event. There is certainly at least one odd aspect to this tale. The stag is an ancient pagan symbol as it bears horns which represent the gods of nature. So it’s puzzling why a portion of the Christian cross should emerge from the antlers of such as animal. However, whatever the reality, the upshot was that the site where Holyrood Abbey was created was, from then on, viewed as one of the city’s most sacred sites.





The stags head emblem of the Canongate burgh. It commemorates a mystic encounter experienced by King David I in 1128.

So does that explain why a new building for the first Scottish parliament in nearly three hundred years was erected close to King David’s mystical encounter? It seems an odd coincidence. And what makes its selection all the more odd was that it was by no means the front runner as the location. Other sites appeared more practical and it was a shock when, out of nowhere, the Holyrood spot was chosen. What was equally strange was that the person who was determined that this would be the place where it should be built was the Glaswegian MP Donald Dewar, the first-ever ‘First Minister’ in Scotland’s new parliament. Donald Dewar was seen as a man with a real down-to-earth and practical approach to life; not the kind of person to have an interest in the mystical side. An interpretation that proved mistaken. After his death it emerged that Dewar had not only amassed a two-million-pound fortune, but that he had gathered a collection of Scottish colourist paintings worth over £400,000. More significant than the value, however, was the fact that the painters attached to this style were linked to the Celtic Revival in Scottish art, which took place in the early years of the last century. They were interested in mystical themes and frequently visited Iona, viewed as an enchanted isle where supernatural entities were reportedly seen, encounters experienced by the artists themselves. Dewar was undoubtedly aware of the historical importance of the location he chose describing it as a, ‘site at the heart of so much Scottish History.’ It was certainly not for practical reasons that Donald Dewar set his own heart on Holyrood. As Scottish National Party leader, Alex Salmond, put it: ‘Donald Dewar seems to have an enormous attachment to personally creating a new piece of architecture for future generations.’

To add to the mystery, the architect, Enrico Miralles, put together a design so strange that it baffled, and continues to baffle, all alike. Some compared it to an upturned boat. On the other hand, when viewed from above, some claimed it had the appearance of a pyramid. To others it resembled the ‘all seeing eye’ of the god Horus, a motif strongly linked to ancient Egypt, but which also appears in various modern guises including, as is well known, the US one-dollar bill. It would be curious if Scotland’s alleged connection with the land of the Pharaohs had resurfaced in the technology obsessed era of the twenty-first century.

Apart from having a strange appearance, the parliament building also cost ten times its original budget to build and is, as experience has shown, expensive to maintain. So why wasn’t a building more straightforward in design, cheaper to build and a more suitable location chosen? Dewar may have been obsessed with the area, but were there other forces at work? Unseen, mystical currents?

Does the answer lie in the power of ley lines? Leys are invisible streams of energy which run in straight lines across the country. Their existence and purpose remains controversial. However, whatever they may be, they definitely appear to exist and can be detected using dowsing rods. Dowsing, using metal or wooden rods to detect objects, is also controversial even though it is regularly employed to find water, oil and minerals, and is used by individuals from archaeologists to electricians to pipe layers. As it is regarded as ‘unscientific’ no one likes to admit to making use of it, but our ancestors were certainly aware of it as every ancient standing-stone circle has, as dowsers have shown, several ley lines running through it. It seems that thousands of years ago people recognised instinctively where this underground energy flowed and built their monuments to connect with them.

This might explain why Arthur’s Seat has a long history as a site with mystical significance. Prehistoric man established many settlements here and began a long tradition of spiritual association with it that continues to the present. In ancient times it was a centre for the worship of the god Lug. It was also the site of later Beltane fire festivals, a tradition which can still be seen in the May Day ritual of climbing the hill. It has a reputation as a place where it is possible to cross from this world to the next, and is peppered with mystic sites, from ‘fairy knowes’ to the medieval St Anthony’s Chapel built by the Knights Templar. In modern times, it became a focus for UFO sightings.

Arthur’s Seat, my investigation has revealed, is the focus for ley lines spreading out across the capital. Several pass through the area where the Scottish parliament now stands. When the site of the parliament was under discussion I, following a request from a newspaper and for a BBC programme, dowsed the Holyrood Site, Calton Hill and an area in Leith, all of which were being proposed as potential locations. I found that Holyrood was by far the most active in terms of leys as it was located so close to Arthur’s Seat. I suggested that because of this it might be better to place it elsewhere as the effect of streams of ley energy is unpredictable. Some have argued that they are beneficial others suggest that they can be harmful. All those involved in the investigation of these issues agree, however, that they have an effect on the individual.

Officials in the UK might be sceptical about the impact of ley lines and ‘earth energy’, but the same isn’t true in other countries. Chinese interest in feng shui is well known, but countries nearer home have also displayed a more open attitude to the influence of these invisible energy streams. You could hardly view Austria and Germany as countries with their heads in the clouds. Indeed, they are generally viewed as extraordinarily level-headed and practical. So if the citizens here take these aspects seriously should we be so determined to scoff at them? The city of Innsbruck, in the heart of Austria, has revealed a willingness to accept that invisible streams of energy — ley lines — run across the city and can influence their lives. In a town park located in the heart of the medieval quarter stands a well-maintained monument. It was a present to the citizens of Innsbruck following a feng shui conference held in the city in 2000. The inscription on the monument reads: ‘The energy stone marks the lung point of the city of Innsbruck. An important energy point, it improves the energy flow and enhances energy potential in the city of Innsbruck. ‘The inscription appears in Italian and German too.

But controlling this energy flow is also seen as a potential benefit. In 2003, Druids were recruited in an effort to reduce accidents on Austria’s roads. A three-hundred-metre stretch on the A9 route through Styria was a particular accident black spot. Leading Druid, Gerald Knobloch, claimed that he had ‘located dangerous elements that had disrupted the energy flow.’ The solution was to restore the energy balance in the area by erecting two quartz stones, each weighing a ton, at the side of the road. There was a fall in the number of accidents. This will come as no surprise to those who dowse earth energies. It seems that they can have an impact on mental perception. As far back as the 1920s, Germans were conducting official investigations into the impact of underground energy flow on people in homes and offices. Buildings were sited to take account of the pathway of leys, especially where they intersected.

Could the architects and movers and shakers of Edinburgh have been influenced in the same way, without being consciously aware of it? Are there strange forces in the aura that surrounds us, or beneath the earth, that lead human minds to create patterns in the landscape? How else can we explain the bizarre findings of David Ovason, discoveries which I can confirm are echoed in the layout of Edinburgh itself.

In 2000, David Ovason published a ground breaking book called The Secret Zodiacs of Washington DC, subtitled Was the City of Stars planned by Masons? It detailed an intensive investigation of the layout of the US capital and has been the subject of widespread comment and several television documentaries. Following years of researching the streets and building of Washington, a project which covered the two hundred years since its foundation, David Ovason came to a startling conclusion. Its architects and planners had built into the city’s layout, either deliberately or unconsciously, a range of figures representing the zodiacal constellation of Virgo. These had been incorporated in buildings, ceiling decorations, fountains and statues, among others. Most puzzling of all, however, Ovason demonstrated convincingly that the layout of streets in the heart of the city also form a diagrammatical representation of Virgo. How could this have come about?

Such figures are not unknown in the UK. As far back as the 1930s, it was claimed that in the area surrounding Glastonbury Tor in Somerset the full range of zodiac figures, including Leo, Aries and Gemini, were outlined in the landscape by hills, streams, woods and lanes. When viewed together from above these features are seen to make out an individual diagrammatic zodiac, just as Davd Ovason later discovered can be found in Washington DC.

I was fascinated by the idea of the Glastonbury Earth Zodiac, and, unaware of David Ovason’s project, wondered if such configurations might exist at ‘sacred spots’ elsewhere. Edinburgh, of course, sprang to mind. During the 1980s, I spent many hours walking the streets of the capital and the surrounding countryside, examining street layouts and looking at the formation of hills and watercourses. I scrutinised photographs taken from above the city and looked at city maps going back centuries. Eventually, I identified several zodiac shapes, which we normally associate with the sky, could be found formed on the ground in and around Edinburgh.

The most prominent is the figure of Aquarius as he dominates the central area of the city. The figure is formed by the outline of roads and other features which give us the shape of a man holding, as befits the ‘water carrier’, a large container. Examining a modern map of the city it can be seen that the brow of Aquarius’s head is formed by the line of Princes Street. One side of the face is outlined by Lothian Road and the North Bridge on the other. The line of the jaw is formed by the Meadows with, incidentally, its well-known ‘Jaw Bone Walk’. To the west, the neck and body can be followed down the A702 to Fairmilehead, and on the east down the A701 to Liberton. An outstretched arm reaches to the town of Dalkeith, formed on the outer side by the A68 to Sheriffhall, and the inner side by the A7, from Nether Liberton to Edinburgh. The hand is formed by the continuation of these two roads to Eskbank. The North Esk River runs through the water carrier’s outstretched hand.

The existence of such a figure seems to defy common sense and I admit that I have to examine it each time afresh to convince myself that it is really there. How could such a figure be formed, which in any case is only visible when looked at from a considerable height or on a map? Has it something to do with the resurgence of Scotland? Is it a coincidence that we have recently moved from the zodiacal Age of Pisces and entered the Age of Aquarius; the very period which has seen the emergence of a more nationally aware Scotland and the setting up of the country’s own parliament? Can there be any connection? Perhaps the appearance of Aquarius in the heart of the city somehow reflects what is taking place in the minds and souls of the citizens of Edinburgh. Whatever the answer, the mystery of the city’s landscape and how it came to be formed, and is still forming, will be, no doubt, an endless topic for debate.

But Edinburgh’s mystic aura can produce rather more direct and disturbing effects. Effects that impact on the individual in a variety of bizarre ways. The capital, at times, appears to be awash with reports of poltergeists, ghosts, aliens beings and vampires. A range of the entities that, among others, appear to haunt the streets and buildings of the city. Unfortunately for the inhabitants these spectres from the ‘other world’ seem to find the ‘Athens of the North’ a very attractive place indeed. There are those who will remain sceptical. But as the following chapters will reveal the sheer number of weird incidents recorded, and the first hand witness accounts, is surely proof enough that Edinburgh can justly lay claim to the title of the world’s strangest capital. It’s hard to think of another city that can even remotely compete.





2


Poltergeists


Is there any difference between a ghost and a poltergeist? A ghost can appear in many forms and seeing one can undoubtedly prove a disturbing experience, particularly if, as psychics claim, he or she is the spirit of a deceased person. We don’t expect to encounter the dead and it can come as a shock to confront the phantom of someone who may be long-buried. Ghosts, however, normally show little interest in their surroundings and may appear quite unaware of them, but it is an entirely different matter with the poltergeist. Here we have an entity which appears to interact with the environment, who seems to demand attention and may quite deliberately set out to frighten and disturb us.

Even so a poltergeist’s activities vary and often start with incidents which appear, on the face of it, trivial. In February 1989, I was called in to investigate events at Coasters Disco, situated in Tollcross. Staff had been disturbed by a series of strange incidents and were looking for an explanation for what was taking place. The dance club occupied three floors of an old building. On the ground floor was the ‘Outer Limits’ disco. The floor above was occupied by the ‘Bermuda Triangle’ and the one above that was known as the ‘Barbados Suite’. They were connected by a main staircase, which was used by customers to move from one hall to another. A second narrower stairway, used only by staff, ran from the bar located in the Barbados Suite all the way down to the ground floor. These were the only two ways by which it was possible to get from one part of the building to another, so neither staff nor anyone else could move about the premises without being noticed. As everyone was on the alert, and someone playing tricks would have been easily spotted, it seemed to rule out human agency as the cause. But what was going on?

Management of the club first became aware that a poltergeist had been activated in the building when the cleaners refused to work alone on the premises, following a succession of odd events. One morning, as staff prepared to clean the floor of the Barbados Suite, a vacuum cleaner of a heavy industrial kind that was used every day, and always functioned normally, suddenly started moving around the room all by itself. What really jangled the cleaners’ nerves was that the machine hadn’t even been plugged in, let alone switched on. As the vacuum cleaner carried out a bizarre ‘dance’ around the room coloured lights suspended from the ceiling started flashing on and off, as if an invisible spirit was playing some kind of strange game.

But this was only the most bizarre of a succession of inexplicable incidents which had stretched over several weeks. At the end of each night glasses were washed then stacked on the shelves behind the bar. In the morning several would be found in pieces, lying on the ground as if they had been deliberately knocked to the floor. There appeared no way that this could happen in any normal manner and it seemed especially odd as, over previous months, they had all remained safely in place. The glass-breaking incidents had started literally overnight as if some malevolent switch had been thrown. Other incidents were as unsettling as they were trivial. Bottles of whisky were moved around the bar overnight and even items like cleaning cloths and liquids would be found in a different spot from where they’d been left when staff had gone home.

It was hard to put these events down simply to chance as they formed a pattern, and the overall picture suggested that a weird force of some kind had been activated, though why this should suddenly come about was hard to explain. Doors were heard opening and closing as if an invisible force was moving through the building. Pools of water formed on the floor of the Barbados Suite out of nowhere; a well-known mark of poltergeist activity and seen frequently as an indication of the presence of a force from another dimension.

Typical of the poltergeist phenomenon were scratching noises heard by cleaning staff. It’s not known why these sounds should be caused by this spirit, but they nearly always seem to occur. The disturbances, however, went beyond these strange incidents and the poltergeist made its presence felt in even more unsettling ways. Female screams echoed through the building when it was known to be empty. However, the phantom that manifested itself, seen by several cleaners early one morning, appeared to be definitely that of a man. It materialised while staff were enjoying a smoke break in the Bermuda Triangle hall. The door connecting the room to the bar above slowly opened and a dark figure appeared then vanished. It was seen quite clearly in the mirrors that ran all the way round the room. Frightening, certainly, but puzzling too. Was this phantom really the cause of so many odd events? And if so why?

A psychic medium, Joan Davidson, after contacting the ‘other side’ suggested that the spirit of a twenty-year-old man was at the root of the problem. He claimed that he had died in a fire where the disco building now stood. On the other hand, a member of staff, Margaret, using her psychic abilities was convinced that the spirit was that of a young woman who was killed on the site. I have been unable to confirm that either event took place, but that is not to say that they didn’t have a basis in fact. However, my investigation of the poltergeist phenomenon over the last twenty years has convinced me that any message received where this phenomenon occurs has, by its very nature, to be doubted. ‘Poltergeist’ means a noisy and mischievous spirit and there can be no doubt that wherever it comes from, and whatever it may be, it sets out deliberately to confuse, annoy and frighten.

A poltergeist invading a house or active in a cemetery might be understandable, but would such a spirit take over a lump of metal? Or a vehicle? In November 2002, railway crew working on a track near the Craigentinny depot were startled to receive an emergency phone call. Officials at Waverley station warned them that a driverless train was heading straight for them. With only seconds to spare the thirty-man team jumped clear of the lines as the engine, weighing a bone-crushing 103 tons, hurtled past them. At 3.30 a.m. on a pitch-dark morning they would never have seen it coming and there’s little doubt that without that phone call several men might have been badly injured. So what had happened? The train with no one in the cab had pulled out of its siding and moved slowly, some might say, almost stealthily, along the track, gradually building up speed. It’s estimated that by the time it had travelled the three miles to Craigentinny it had reached twenty miles an hour, fast enough to cause a disaster which was only averted after the train, a class 80 electric locomotive hired to pull the Highlander Sleeper service, was turned on to a siding, still driverless. Railway experts have had a century and a half of building safety into train engines and each locomotive is packed full of failsafe devices, so how could a modern train move off all on its own? Naturally, ‘mechanical failure’ was the explanation favoured by officials, but how many trains do you read of starting up without a driver present? None, thankfully, apart from this one. So could some poltergeist, intent on causing havoc, have interfered with the controls? Or did some entity invade the very engine itself and furnish it with a malevolent will of its own?

Individuals may experience an event suggestive of poltergeist activity, but which goes no further than a one-off incident. In the 1980s, Lynn was sitting in her flat in Dundas Street drinking a cup of coffee. She was holding the mug tightly in her hand when, suddenly, it shot from her grasp in a straight line, feet above the floor, to hit the opposite wall, where it broke into pieces. Lynn was shocked and could think of no reason to explain what had happened. It never occurred again. In 2006, Euan, a student, was living in a flat in Arden Street where, from time to time, he would hear the sounds of a woman singing operatic songs. The voice, which had an unearthly quality, seemed to come from the flat below and the singing, which would last only a few minutes at a time, broke out with no obvious pattern. The incidents struck him as strange and out of place in a building which was occupied mainly by students at this time. In 1988, Caitlin, then a teenager, was alone in the cottage where she was staying on an estate near South Queensferry. She was off school on this particular day because she had not been feeling well and was lying in bed with the covers pulled up. Suddenly, she felt a weight across her legs as if someone had crept up silently and lain across them. Petrified, she was too scared to move, but as nothing more happened she looked up gingerly over the covers only to discover that there was no one there. As in Lynn’s experience, nothing odd happened after this. But what these incidents, among many others, do suggest is that poltergeist phenomena are more frequent than is imagined or reported. They are overlooked simply because they do not develop into a full-blown poltergeist infestation. If we knew the reason why we might be nearer to explaining what type of spirit we are dealing with.

So how seriously should we take the poltergeist phenomenon? Those with an interest in the ‘world beyond’ have found themselves unable to ignore it. In May 1974, the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland set up a working party with the aim of examining, ‘the results of the recent experiments in the field of Parapsychology, paying particular attention to those which might have some bearing on the present day understanding and good expression of the Christian faith.’ Over the next two years, the committee examined ‘card-guessing experiments, emotions in plants [anticipating Prince Charles], Uri Geller,’ among others, and exorcism. It issued its report in May 1976. The committee didn’t come to any definite conclusion with regard to parapsychology, but on exorcism its advice was quite specific. It recommended that:



Ministers of the Church of Scotland should be enjoined from conducting a special ceremony of Exorcism. We recommend that any person encountering a case of alleged ‘possession’ should refer it to a physician and should remain in consultation with him as to treatment thereafter.



On the face of it this seemed to suggest that, though poltergeist and possession may not be identical phenomena, they are closely linked and that, therefore, the Working Party did not accept that poltergeist manifestations had any basis in fact.

This, however, had not always been the church’s attitude and, even in 1974, this may not have been the unanimous view of the clergy. In the winter of 1959, a house was so badly affected by poltergeist activity that a Church of Scotland minister was called in to cleanse the house of the infestation. The building was situated in Winton Terrace, Fairmilehead, and was occupied by Baroness Kilbride. The minister who carried out the exorcism was the Reverend J.W. Stevenson who was at the time well known as the editor of the Church of Scotland’s official magazine Life and Work.

The kind of phenomenon that was experienced was typical of the effects linked to the poltergeist. The sounds of heavy objects crashing to the floor echoed through the rooms, but when the noises were investigated there was nothing obvious to explain the disturbance. Doors opened and closed by themselves when there was no one present. Articles were moved from one room to another including a pair of binoculars which, having been placed in an upstairs room, was somehow transported to a table on the ground floor while all five occupants of the house were huddled together on the stairs.

It appears that the Reverend Stevenson recognised that, ‘there was … some kind of spirit presence,’ but that ‘it was a very obscure phenomenon.’ A view which anyone who has dealt with poltergeist activity would wholeheartedly endorse. He denied that his attempt to end the phenomenon was an exorcism. However, it appears to have been that in all but name as he said a prayer ‘for the deliverance of any spirit chained and held to this life.’ Remarkably, the prayer appeared to work and the strange incidents which had gone on for some time stopped. This may have been coincidence, but, psychics say that if an effort is made to communicate with the poltergeist who, it has been suggested, may be a spirit which refuses to move on, then making contact can persuade the entity to leave the place to which it is attached.

Of course, others take a less sanguine view of the poltergeist phenomenon and doubt that appeals to the entity’s good nature can have any effect. Poltergeists, in my experience, reveal a degree of cunning and devious behaviour that can certainly challenge the view that we are dealing simply with a ‘lost’ or ‘playful’ spirit. Events in Greyfriars Kirkyard could be evidence for that.

On 28 October 2009, I visited Greyfriars Kirkyard in the company of well-known Scottish medium Gary Gray. Gary has earned a reputation as a psychic who can furnish detailed information provided by the spirits of the dead. Given that much has been written regarding poltergeist activity in the graveyard, I wanted to see what he would make of it all. I should say that though I had visited Greyfriars Kirk in the past, and even attended a wedding there in the 1970s, I had not personally been aware of any paranormal activity and had seen it purely as a site of historic interest. In the 1980s, however, when I was conducting various psychic investigations across the city I was told of an incident at Greyfrairs that had taken place as far back as the 1960s.

Louise Ross had been visiting Greyfriars Kirk in the company of her then boyfriend David. He was not from Edinburgh and so Louise was taking him round various places of interest and, having visited the Chambers Street Museum, walked him up to see the grave of Greyfriars Bobby. From there they wandered further into the cemetery. David found it quite interesting and went from grave to grave searching for the names of well-known figures. Louise, less interested, lagged behind and at one point David disappeared out of sight having headed towards the Flodden Wall. As Louise stood waiting for him to return she spotted a figure in the distance. He seemed to be staring at her. It made Louise feel a bit uncomfortable and she looked around hoping that David was coming back towards her, but he was still out of sight. She was trying to ignore the figure standing at the graveside, happy at least that there was a good gap between them, but somehow she could not help glancing at it. As she did so she noticed that it was moving towards her and, what was more disturbing, not only appeared to be glowing which she hadn’t noticed before, but floating slightly above the ground. Louise admits that as this was in November the light was fading, not because it was late in the afternoon, but because the sky was becoming heavily overcast with dark cloud, so the figure was not as clear as it might have been. She is adamant though that this is what she saw. Louise explained, ‘I was transfixed to the spot. I couldn’t believe what I was seeing. I wanted to run and shout for David, but I seemed just frozen.’ The figure kept moving towards her and just when she thought it was going to come right up to her it simply vanished in an instant.

But Louise’s relief was short-lived for a moment later she felt a sharp tug on the back of her hair as if someone was trying to pull her round. Immediately she thought of David, but when she turned about there was no one there. This was too much for Louise who found her voice and ‘screamed for David to come’ as she put it. David ran over and found Louise white and shaking. She said:



I tried to explain what had happened, but I was just jabbering. But I think he guessed that something odd had occurred and we got out of there double fast. When I had calmed down I told him about it. I don’t know if he believed me though.



Louise added that she had never had any supernatural experiences previously and hadn’t had one since. The incident at Greyfriars Kirk had been a one-off.

I’m not sure why, at the time this was related to me in the 1980s, I did not take it more seriously. Louise was not sure exactly where the event had occurred though she thought it was at the lower slope of the graveyard, which would have taken it away from the site of George Mackenzie’s mausoleum and the Covenanters’ Prison where many strange incidents have recently been reported. I did go as far as visiting the cemetery accompanied by a friend who was a psychic some months after first hearing Louise’s story, but nothing of real significance was picked up. I was surprised, therefore, when Greyfrairs hit the headlines as a spot where poltergeist manifestations seemed to have exploded into a ‘hot spot’ of activity. On reflection, however, it can be seen that this fits the pattern of such events. There seems to be a burst of such incidents which may last for a few days, months or, in some cases, years, but then things quieten down. It may be that the graveyard will fit this model, though given the interest in the events there, it is possible that the entities involved will feed off this and somehow sustain their presence for some considerable time.





The Covenanter’s prison at Greyfriar’s Kirk. Scene of terrifying poltergeist activity

This time, with Gary Gray present, I was determined to carry out a more thorough investigation and while Gary was in contact with the spirits I dowsed using my diving rods. I have found through several years’ experience that the rods can be used for many different purposes and react in those areas where spirits have been active. As we walked together through the graveyard it was astonishing how both Gary and I, using different abilities, got very similar results. The rods went haywire at the sloping, south side of the kirkyard, and Gary confirmed that there was intense spirit activity in this area. On the other side, on the slope overlooking the church, it was very quiet. I have to say that I have never experienced such a different result in a single enclosed space like this. The church itself was the dividing line which appeared to mark the boundary between one very active spirit area and one very quiet one. But here is the most bizarre aspect of it all. The ‘quiet area’ was where the mausoleum of George Mackenzie is located; one area where it has been reported people have experienced intense poltergeist activity. So why did Gary not pick up ‘signals’ at such a spot? Gary told me, ‘If there were spirits here they would contact me.’ I have to agree as Gary undoubtedly possesses a very high degree of psychic ability.

Personally, I found this unnerving. It suggested to me that either the area had somehow been swept clean of spirit activity. Or that some powerful force was deliberately blocking spirit communication and simply did not want anyone to make contact with Gary. But how and why could that happen? Was it afraid of what might be revealed to such a powerful medium?

Gary, who lives in Glasgow, had not previously visited Greyfriars Kirk. What made this an even more interesting visit for him was that his mother had been born in Candlemaker Row, which runs down the side of the graveyard, so it was a rather poignant moment for Gary as it was the first time that he had seen that as well. As soon as Gary walked past the entrance gate into the cemetery the spirits seemed to come rushing to him. ‘I’m getting the name “John Gray,”’ he told me after only a few steps inside. ‘I’m being pulled in this direction.’ I followed Gary down a side path looking at the names on the gravestone as we walked. He pulled up suddenly. ‘I’m getting the name very strongly here.’ I stopped too and looked around. Then almost fell backwards in astonishment. There on the marker directly behind Gary was the name ‘John Gray’. I know for a fact Gary was completely unaware, as was I, that this was the name of the owner of the legendary Skye terrier ‘Greyfriars Bobby’. It was amazing confirmation of Gary’s psychic skills.





George Mackenzie’s mausoleum at Greyfriar’s Kirk. Does Mackenzie’s spirit still prowl the graveyard and cause the strange phenomena experienced here, as has been claimed?

We continued in a similar way for the next few hours with Gary repeatedly mentioning names which we discovered on tombstones with the details Gary had indicated. One was a lady called ‘Jessica’ who appeared to Gary in an old-fashioned dress which he thought might have been of an eighteenth-century design. Gary explained that she kept coming to the cemetery because her husband was buried here and she still could not get over his death. He also saw two young children, a brother and sister, who used to play near the bottom entrance to the kirkyard.

During the time that we were there Gary was unaware of any feelings of evil, of the kind that produced the assaults on individuals that have been reported. I asked Gary that, if there was nothing evil present, who or what was the entity who was touching and frightening people who came there? He replied, ‘there is the spirit of a man present who used to spend his time tending the graveyard. He resents people coming into the cemetery and is trying to get them to go away.’ Could that explain the poltergeist? An entity which resents the presence of others? It certainly fits with the experience of some.

In the 1950s, events at Hazeldean Terace in Gilmerton attracted nationwide attention. Over a three-year period, starting in 1954, a couple, Mr and Mrs Currie, had experienced many instances of poltergeist activity in the house they then occupied. They were typical of the bizarre and often seemingly pointless activities of these ‘noisy spirits’. Every Wednesday when the kitchen lay empty the wooden cover for their sink, which, as one observer noted, was ‘tight and flush fitting and could not be moved without a strong pull’, was lifted by an invisible hand out of its place and hurled with considerable force to the floor. The resulting crash would echo like the thunder of an express train through the building. In other incidents a watch-glass, tumbler and record player lying on the draining board were smashed to bits. ‘I used to go upstairs to bed,’ Mrs Currie explained, ‘leaving these objects in the kitchen. When I came down in the morning they were broken. Oddly, the tumbler, a thick Jacobean type, had not disintegrated, even though it landed on the concrete of the kitchen floor. It was broken clean in half.’





Hazeldean terrace. Peaceful today, but fifty years ago the street was the focus of a series of weird events.

In 1954, reporters from the Evening Dispatch newspaper conducted an experiment in the kitchen. It was an attempt to photograph the poltergeist in action and prove that this was no trick carried out by human agency. A string was attached from the board fitted over the sink to the trigger mechanism of the camera. If it moved the camera would be set off and whoever or whatever moved it would be caught on film. The door to the kitchen was then locked and the investigators who were alone in the house waited to see what happened next.

At three in the morning a loud bang, as if wood was being hit by a heavy object, echoed from the kitchen. As the reporters described it, ‘We rushed into the room and found … nothing. The noise had stopped as suddenly as it had started.’ However, the evidence that an inexplicable event had occurred was there for all to see. A tumbler which had split almost in two lay on the linoleum. A rug had been lifted up and lay in a heap beneath the bunker. It seemed as if the only reasonable explanation for the events lay in the realm of the paranormal. It appears, however, that nothing that could explain the incident was caught on film.

As is often the case, there seemed to be no obvious reason as to why the house at Hazeldean Terrace had been subjected to these mysterious series of events. According to Mrs Currie, ‘When I first heard the strange noises I was frightened to tell my husband in case he laughed at me. But when he experienced them himself he was forced to take it seriously.’ Mr Currie said:



One day, when I was off ill and upstairs in bed, I heard banging in the kitchen. I rushed downstairs and everything was suddenly quiet. The door to the hall and kitchen were both wide open and the rugs were thrown into a bundle. I shut the doors and tidied up the room and then went back to bed. No sooner was I beneath the covers when the noise started again.



When he investigated he found the doors again flung wide open and the rugs in a heap.

Again, as often happens, the activity fluctuated over time. By 1957, Mrs Currie could report that:



The noises and breaking of crockery are less frequent now. Maybe once a month, sometimes twice now. Apart from the continued breaking of my china it does us no harm. I prefer not to meddle with the spirits and things I do not understand. It’s all better left alone.



She explained that the couple were not worried for themselves, but they didn’t want their children to be upset by the events.

The events at Hazeldean Terrace eventually petered out. But had the poltergeist simply moved on to another location? In September 1958, the Van Horne family found themselves the target of unwanted and unexpected activity. According to one account, they had purchased some second-hand furniture, which they were told had belonged to a sailor who had died recently, and was being sold off at a bargain price. However, according to another account, the object which seemed to have caused so much trouble was acquired in a more puzzling way. It seems that a relative from the north of Scotland sent the family a piece of wood which had been rescued from a ruined cottage. They had, it seems, some kind of sentimental connection with the place though exactly what is unclear. Perhaps the purchase of furniture coincided with the arrival of the mysterious piece of wood and, in retrospect, the two events became linked in some way.

Whatever the truth, the various items of furniture, chairs and a sideboard, were taken back to the Van Horne residence at number 5, Rothesay Place. It wasn’t long before the furniture began to take on a life of its own. Tapping noises could be heard. Ornaments placed on the furniture were found to have moved by themselves or were discovered lying on the floor. The family noticed a smell of tobacco smoke in the house which could not be accounted for. Neighbours complained of knocking through the kitchen wall when there was no one in the house. Family members watched on several occasions as the drawers on the dressing table opened and shut all by themselves. This was certainly evidence that a poltergeist had invaded the house, but what happened after was quite strange. The day following the dressing-table incident, Mrs Van Horne decided to burn the mysterious chunk of wood that had been sent from up north. Doing this certainly seemed to trigger something as the following morning the neighbours beneath her flat asked her what on earth she had been up to. They had been disturbed all night by a persistent knocking in the area of her fireplace.

There does seem evidence, however, that ‘something’ was present in the house. This entity, according to Mrs Van Horne, appeared as a shimmering circle of light which moved about the walls and responded when spoken to; the shimmering increased in intensity as if an effort was being made to communicate. A ball of light is believed by psychics to be a spirit or being from another world and so, though Mrs Van Horne labelled it ‘Tinkerbell’, it could have been anything but harmless. One thing is quite clear from the many reports of poltergeist activity, these entities pretend to be many things, from angels to demons, and manifest themselves in many forms, in fact, any shape they choose to.

Exactly what causes a poltergeist to become active is unclear. Would such an entity erupt because of an incident thousands of miles away? Would ‘it’, whatever ‘it’ is, be incensed because an object had been removed and taken to a new location? That objects appear somehow to attract entities from other worlds is confirmed in the notorious events surrounding Sir Alexander Seton. Seton no doubt thought that it was a bit of a coup to have been able to purchase and then bring home, in 1936, a piece of bone from a tomb of a pharaoh buried at Giza in Egypt. Within a matter of months he was to bitterly regret it. Over the following year, his wife, Lady Seton, suffered two serious illnesses and Alexander Seton was similarly brought down by ill health. It had all started innocently enough as Seton recalled:



We were on holiday in Egypt and invited to accompany an official party at the opening of a new pharaoh’s tomb from 3,000 BC. It had never been entered since that time. My wife thought it would be nice to have a memento and asked if she could have a piece of bone to take away. Removing objects is strictly forbidden and an official warned her not to in case anything untoward happened. She thought this a joke and was given a piece of bone.



The object was kept in a glass case in the dining room of their house at Learmonth Gardens. The bone was described as ‘honeycombed with age and as light as a feather.’ It certainly looked innocuous, but it had not been in its place for long when unexplained fires broke out in the building on two separate occasions. Phantoms started to appear and several witnesses described seeing a robed figure pacing the floors at night. A nine-year-old boy staying with the family woke them all one night shrieking with terror. When they went to investigate he was cowering under the bed clothes. He told them that he had gone to the bathroom and on the way had seen a figure clothed in ‘a big dressing gown going into the living room.’ When Sir Alexander went to investigate there was no one there.

However, Sir Alexander claimed that the incident could not be put down to the boy’s imagination. He explained:



A woman friend of ours also saw this figure. She heard someone walking about during the night and thinking it was my wife came out of her room. She saw the figure disappearing into the drawing-room. She followed and saw it standing at the table on which the bone rests. When she switched on the light it disappeared.



The Setons decided to get rid of the bone and gave it to a surgeon friend believing that he would be too clear-headed to be unnerved by anything and asked him to examine it. However, a member of the surgeon’s staff was confronted by the robed figure and was so shocked that, staggering back, she fell and broke a bone in her leg. Was this a message to the Setons who had a ‘broken bone’ as a display trophy? The surgeon returned the bone refusing to have anything more to do with it. This event suggests that whatever was the origin of the ‘curse’ it was linked to the bone itself and its removal from its rightful place of burial.

Back with Sir Alexander, the bone continued its baleful effect. Glasses and ornaments were found smashed on the floor the following morning. The events had a definite wearing effect on Sir Alexander who told the Daily Express in March 1937:



I can’t explain these things. I wish I could for my own peace of mind. I laughed at the idea at first, but now I frankly confess that I am a little scared of the thing. I would willingly give the bone to anyone who would promise to treat it with respect. I will not have it destroyed, and I don’t think it should be regarded as a joke and made a sort of party game.



In spite of all this Lady Seton had no intention of parting with the bone, believing that her illnesses had nothing to do with it as she had protected it and brought it from Egypt. However, according to later reports a priest was called in to exorcise the house. This did not seem to work so the bone was burnt and the ashes scattered. Then, apparently, the curse, if it was such, finally stopped. Or perhaps there had been some strange power in the bone which attracted, or activated, the poltergeist which was itself then destroyed as the bone finally burnt to nothing. Or, again, maybe the poltergeist simply moved on to carry out weird tricks elsewhere.

In 1954, Michael Rodgers made a strange claim from his home in Saughton. He reported that writing had been appearing on his sitting room walls since his wife had died a few years previously. What was even stranger was that Mr Rodgers claimed that the messages that were appearing could help solve the disappearance of Ian Aitken who, at that time, had been missing from his Edinburgh home for over two years. Mr Rogers explained that one night he had noticed that a street lamp shining through his front windows cast a pattern on the opposite wall. He believed that the pattern formed a ‘three-quarter view’ of his wife’s face. Below it was another face which he believed to be that of a relative who died shortly after his wife. According to Mr Rogers, it was in fact the curtains which were the conduit for the effect, projection the supernatural image on the wall.

But, according to Mr Rogers, not only were faces appearing, but writing too. And it is this phenomenon which suggests that we are dealing here with a poltergeist. This writing, he believed, was an attempt by his wife to help solve a missing person case, that of ten-year-old Ian Aitken. Ian left his home at Newport Street on the afternoon of 3 September 1951, and simply disappeared. A journalist who visited the house reported that he could not make out the writing nor the faces described by Mr Rodgers and that what was being seen could have been a distortion of the street light as it passed through the window panes and lace curtains. That appears, on the face of it, a reasonable explanation. However, on the other hand, there is no doubt that dozens of people did see the images claimed by Michael Rogers, though whether it was truly his wife who was communicating with him must be open to doubt.

In the 1930s and 1940s, the then Edinburgh Psychic College had a ‘Committee for the Recording of Abnormal Happenings’. Its members investigated and reported on alleged cases of haunting and poltergeist activity. One of its most sensitive cases involved poltergeist incidents at a city manse, the exact location of which has been kept under wraps up to the present day. The disturbances in the building had been of a very violent character. Furniture had been badly damaged and paintings on the walls would be found in the morning lying on the floor with their glass panes smashed to pieces. Several witnesses observed furniture not only moving by itself, but being thrown about with such force that if people had been hit they would have certainly been injured. Curtains spontaneously caught fire when it was clear that there was no one present. An exorcism carried out did nothing to stop the incidents. One member of the committee who visited the manse reported that after she had left the sitting room she heard a crash. She immediately rushed back in to find that a table in the room had been overturned and the articles which had been lying on it were scattered across the floor. She was sure that no one could have passed her to get into the room. It was undoubtedly good first-hand evidence that ‘something’ was causing these strange events to occur. It seems, however, that the number of incidents became less frequent and then died out. And that, generally, is the only assurance that can be given to those who find themselves victims of the ‘noisy spirit’. Experience shows that no matter how intensive the level of activity it normally passes over in time though no one can be sure why.

In the early years of the new millennium, I was called in to investigate a strange series of events that had occurred in premises in the Barnton area. The house, which occupied two floors, was an old building with modern additions. Ann, who had moved in with her children, had sensed soon after they arrived that the building was generating an unhappy atmosphere. She wasn’t wrong. Ann had only been there a few months when a series of inexplicable events took place.

Ann was working in the kitchen one evening when she heard the sound of glass breaking and then crashing against the wall. It seemed to come from the sitting room which faced on to the back garden. Ann ran through just in time to see a foot pulling back through the smashed pane. Bravely she went over to take a look, but there was no one to be seen. She sensed though did not immediately fully appreciate that there was something odd about the incident as she could not remember seeing a body attached to the leg, though the leg had appeared solid enough. That thought, however, occurred later. In the meantime, she ran upstairs and looked out, but there appeared to be no one about. She called the police. They conducted an immediate search of the garden, but there was no sign of any intruder and, what was puzzling, no evidence of the footprints the police might have expected to find. It was all rather odd.

The following day, an equally strange incident took place. At around 9 a.m. Ann’s young daughter told her that there was a strange man dressed all in black staring through the glass in the door. When Ann opened it there was no one there, but there was blood on parts of the woodwork. Disturbed, especially after the previous night’s events, Ann called the police. A search was made of the house and though nothing had been stolen they discovered splashes of blood, several quite substantial, in Ann’s bedroom, but nowhere else. It was bizarre and even the police could not explain it. How had someone entered the premises, bled all over one small area of the house, and then disappeared without being seen?

A few months later, Ann was lying in bed asleep when she suddenly woke up feeling completely paralysed. She felt as if someone or something was lying across her chest. As she watched the handset of the phone at the bedside lifted itself from its resting place, shot over and crashed against her head. Then she saw the outline of a tall, dark figure moving around the room. The whole experience felt unreal and passed as quickly as it had come on. As Ann recovered from her shock she began to wonder whether it had been some strange dream. She walked over to a mirror and stepped back in shock. There on her forehead was a large bruise exactly where the handset had caught her. It had certainly not been a dream. But what on earth was going on?

Ann became aware of more strange incidents. The sound of footsteps, heavy and confident, walking up and down the hall could often be heard. The bedroom door would swing open, but there would be no one there. One weekend, at around 12.30 in the morning, Ann was watching a film. During the break she headed for the toilet and on the way she heard a wailing voice which she thought was coming from one of the bedrooms. She stood outside listening. The sounds seemed definitely to be originating from inside. It sounded like someone in distress. However, when she summoned up the courage to go into the room it was empty and the sound now seemed to be coming from outside the front door. Ann went to take a look, but again there was no one there. The moans continued, however, sounding increasingly like someone in pain. It was definitely the voice of a woman. The sounds were upsetting and being unable to locate the source was, as Ann told me, frightening. So much so that she decided to, as she put it, ‘barricade ourselves in my bedroom’ where she remained till it was light.

It’s often reported that animals seem aware of a presence even more so than their owners. Ann’s dog would bark and growl in the direction of the living room door even when there was no one there. When the wailing incident happened he hid under the bed and wouldn’t come out. At other times he would stare at one corner of the living room and howl.

One evening, a few months later, Ann had several people in the house. They all heard the back door open and then a peculiar scratching noise. A friend went to the kitchen to investigate. There was a man standing there scratching the radiator. He was in his early twenties with distinctively red hair, dressed in a shirt and jeans. She was struck by the fact that he was very pale, almost ghostly looking. She ran back to tell the others, but when they all went through there was no one there. Only a few seconds had passed, but the man had simply disappeared. No one had heard the door shut, but when they tried it was not only closed, but locked just as Ann knew she always left it. Had this been a poltergeist entity in human form?

These events were certainly unusual both in the length of time they continued and their intensity and variety. They showed no signs of simply stopping and may have been the exception to the rule that the phenomenon lasts for only a short period and gradually fades away. There are, however, some investigators, and I include myself, who doubt that we can simply slot unexplained phenomena into convenient, exclusive pigeonholes. Poltergeist and ghost activity often appear to overlap and other weird entities too may be a part of some strange ‘other world’, which we are simply unable to understand.





3


Witchcraft, Magic and Satanism


In the 1980s, the leading paranormal expert of his day, Edinburgh’s Charles Cameron, commented: ‘There is no doubt that the Lothians has more than its fair share of ghosts and weird happenings. This could be due to the large number of witches’ covens which operated in the area.’ What Charles Cameron was suggesting was that the activities of covens in and around the city over the centuries, the acts of ritual magic they had engaged in, and psychic warfare between individual witches, had a deep influence. By constantly disturbing the ether, witch covens had allowed spirits, poltergeists and other entities easy access to our dimension and this could explain why Edinburgh was such a hot spot of paranormal activity.

But if Charles Cameron was right, how had such a situation come about? Witchcraft in the Lothians has a long pedigree, but exactly how it developed remains a mystery. Druids and other pagan sects were active and many of the practices carried out by witches appear to be based on ancient pagan rites. Certainly the spells and potions allegedly used by witches seem to have been passed down the centuries and were used in rituals carried out for a variety of reasons, from curing illness to catching criminals. But why were these acts of magic suddenly seen as threatening? And why did those who used ritual magic become branded as witches almost overnight? Is it possible that a supernatural entity who we call the Devil emerged from another dimension and began to use selected individuals to create disorder? Witchcraft may be branded as ‘fantasy’, but those who claimed to have met Satan had no doubt that they were encountering an entity of some kind. And those at the receiving end of witchcraft believed in the supernatural powers of witches. People feared that a secret army of evildoers existed, which was engaged in a deadly war against mankind, and that their commander-in-chief was the Devil himself.

And if King James VI sitting in Holyrood Palace with his court of sophisticated nobles could take the threat from witchcraft seriously, is it any wonder that his subjects felt they had even more reason to be afraid? James was brought up in an atmosphere where the activities of witches were seen as part and parcel of the landscape. In 1479, the Earl of Mar was accused of trying to kill his brother King James III by witchcraft and, in 1537, Lady Glamis was burned alive for using magic charms against King James V. In fact James VI considered the power of witchcraft so dangerous that he wrote a book exposing and condemning their practices. It was called Demonology. James had good reason to be nervous. He believed he had been targeted by a coven of witches who had used various spells in an attempt to murder him. This conspiracy to kill the king by black magic even involved one of the leading noblemen of the time, the Earl of Bothwell.

The bizarre events of 1590, which have been seen by many to prove that witchcraft was a reality, started in an innocent manner. Gillie Duncan, a servant and general help, apparently developed overnight an ability to cure the sick and she was often consulted for remedies when people fell ill. But not everyone found this so comforting. Suspicions were aroused, especially those of her employer David Seaton. He was convinced that Gillie’s ability to heal must have come from some other-worldly source and, to prove it, he had her tortured to get to the truth. Gillie’s fingers were squeezed in thumbscrews and her head and neck wrenched with a knotted rope. She refused, however, to confess to any wrongdoing so Seaton stripped her naked and searched her body for evidence of a mark left by the Devil; a ‘seal’ that Satan was believed to put on his followers to brand them like cattle to show that they now belonged to him. Seaton claimed that he found just such a mark on Gillie’s neck. Gillie was put in gaol where she underwent further torture in an effort to force a confession from her.

Gillie, in fact, did confess. So had Seaton been right all along? She alleged that several of her neighbours had sold their souls to Satan, including Agnes Sampson, known as ‘the wise woman of Keith’, Robert Grierson, a sailor, ‘the potter’s wife at Seaton’, and ‘the smith at the Briggs Hall’. Those she named were certainly no’ big fish’, though Agnes Sampson was destined to play a key role as events unfolded, but the ears of the witch-hunters pricked up when Gillie mentioned Dr John Fian as one of Satan’s followers. The investigation immediately took a sharp turn, one that ended right at the heart of the Scottish Government.

John Fian was, on the face of it, a simple country school teacher who lived at Saltpans near Tranent. His job seemed far removed from the world of political machination, but Fian also acted as secretary to the Earl of Bothwell, a descendant of the husband of Mary Queen of Scots. What set minds racing, when Fian was accused of witchcraft, was that Bothwell was suspected by the king of planning to overthrow him and take the crown for himself. There had not always been bad blood between them. James had at one time trusted the Earl to such an extent that, when he sailed to Denmark to take home his bride-to-be, Anne of Denmark, he left Bothwell in charge of the country. However, on his return he heard rumours, which he apparently took seriously, that Bothwell had used the time the king was abroad to build up a power base which he intended to use to make himself king. James, always fearful and distrusting, was certainly at this time looking for an opportunity to bring Bothwell down. If the Earl was implicated in witchcraft then the Devil had, however unwittingly, provided James with the chance to deal with this formidable, though earthly, enemy, and strike a blow against Satan at the same time.

And not only did Bothwell have a close association with Fian, it was also claimed that he visited Agnes Sampson regularly who was well known in the area as a healer and white witch, and had asked her to predict the date of the king’s death. To predict the monarch’s life span by means of magic was treason and those found guilty could face execution. Bothwell, however, was too powerful simply to be treated in the way Gillie Duncan had been. James was determined though and personally interviewed Agnes Sampson, ordering that she be returned to prison and a confession forced from her when she refused to admit to being a witch.

As a suspected witch, Agnes was immediately tortured. Her neck was twisted by the use of a knotted rope and the ‘witches bridle’, an iron head cage with four sharp prongs, forced into her mouth. When this didn’t bring an admission of guilt she was beaten about the head, stripped naked, shaved of all hair until at last the Devil’s mark was found, a discoloured patch around her genitals. Faced with this evidence Agnes confessed that she belonged to a coven of witches who had been plotting to murder King James by witchcraft. She was taken to Holyrood Palace so that James could hear the details straight from Agnes’s mouth, and a truly bizarre story emerged.

Agnes explained that the coven to which she belonged met at North Berwick Kirk and it was here that they had gathered on All Hallow’s Eve while James was in Denmark to meet Anne, his bride-to-be. Their intention at this time was to create a magic spell to kill James. They formed a circle, holding hands and performed a reel, chanting words of magic while Gillie Duncan provided the music on a harp. At a signal the reel came to a sudden halt and the coven, led by Gillie, moved in procession to the kirk. Candles were burning on the altar and flames turning blue signalled the arrival of the Devil himself who appeared as an ordinary man dressed in dark clothes. He now ordered the members of the coven to submit to him and, stretching himself naked across the altar, ordered each witch to kiss his bare buttocks.

James was doubtful about Agnes’s account, but Gillie Duncan was brought in. She confirmed the details given by Agnes even to the extent of playing the tune on a harp she had played at North Berwick Kirk. Was this independent confirmation that these events had really happened? Agnes then told James that from the pulpit the Devil had branded the king as ‘the greatest enemy I have in the world’. She added to the mix more strange tales of travel by magic to distant lands, the recruitment of an army of witches and plots hatched to murder and maim.

James had had enough. ‘You are all liars’, he barked. Now came a bizarre turning point. Agnes approached James and whispered in his ear the very words that had passed between him and Queen Anne in their bedroom suite on the very first night of their marriage. ‘By the living gods’, James retorted in amazement, ‘all the Devils in Hell could not have discovered the same’. In a second he was convinced that some kind of black magic had been used to eavesdrop on this private conversation. It was a simple moment that was to have severe repercussions. So why did Agnes do it? And how did she know what James had said to Anne? We do not know what words were spoken so it is hard to be sure if Agnes could have simply guessed. But she was taking a risk even in claiming the knowledge as if she was wrong then she would immediately be discredited. But, it has to be asked, why would she want to be proved right? Because in doing so she branded herself by her own mouth as a witch with the inevitable result of being involved in a plot to murder the king. And there could be no escape from an inevitable fate.

The noose connecting the Earl of Bothwell, Agnes Sampson and John Fian was being drawn tighter. Agnes claimed that Fian had asked to carry a letter to another member of the coven, arranging a date to carry out a black magic ceremony on the shore of the Firth of Forth. This may have been the plan to whip up a storm with the Devil’s help intended to sink the King’s boat as it sailed back from Denmark. However, Agnes claimed that even before this attempt she had been plotting to kill James by witchcraft.

She trapped a black toad, hung it up by its heels from the branch of a living tree for three days and collected the venom as it dropped. There are no black toads in Scotland and none that are venomous so it would seem likely that Agnes meant that a magic spell or ritual was used to turn fluid from the toad into poison. But how could Agnes Sampson possibly get close enough to James to administer the venom? The mystery undoubtedly deepens and the way she achieved this suggests, at the very least, some strange goings on. By some manner she got in touch with, or perhaps knew, James Kerr, an attendant in the King’s bedchamber. He had access to James’s clothes. Agnes asked him to rub the poison on one of James’s shirts. If he couldn’t manage that Kerr was to cut a piece of any article which James wore next to his body and pass it to her. She would rub the poison into it and through magic it would kill the king. Kerr would have nothing to do with it, but didn’t report Agnes’s approach to James. It’s odd that there is no evidence that he was ever pulled up or questioned over the matter. One more puzzling issue within these enigmatic events.

It may have been the failure of Agnes’s plan that led to the coven, on John Fian’s orders, gathering at the Water of Leith where it emptied into the Forth. A cat caught that day was christened with James’s name and, for the purpose of the act of magic, became James. The arms and legs of a corpse had been obtained and were tied to the animal. The coven then sailed out to sea and, chanting in a ritual manner, threw the cat with the limbs attached into the water. They watched and continued chanting as the creature drowned. It died as the coven believed James would now die; the victim of the storm they believed they had conjured up through their magic. And a storm did, in fact, erupt and sank a ship sailing out to meet the King’s convoy as it arrived in the Forth. The ship that the king was aboard was saved from the storm because, as Agnes explained, ‘his great Christian faith blunted our evil and brought him safely to shore.’

Agnes’s confession was not good news for the Earl of Bothwell who, growing increasingly nervous over the turn of events, retreated to Crichton Castle in East Lothian and waited to see what would happen next. The taint of ‘witchcraft’ grew increasingly close as his secretary John Fian was taken into custody.

John Fian was not the Tranent schoolmaster’s real name. It was, in fact, John Cunningham and the designation ‘Dr Fian’ must have been a nickname of some kind revealing the view of people at the time of his activities. ‘Fian’ is clearly derived from Fean, Feane or Fianne, all of which refer to a ‘fairy’ or other-world connection. Cunningham was seen as either a man with second sight or a man who dabbled in those areas which lay beyond the power of ordinary men.

Following his arrest Fian was given the chance to confess, but denied being a witch or part of a coven. However, the authorities were determined to get him to admit his guilt. The gaolers clamped the apparatus known as the ‘Spanish boot’ to each of his legs. This encased the area from the knee to the shin in metal. It prevented the bone from breaking immediately as an iron hammer was crashed repeatedly against the ‘boot’, but the pain was terrible and the legs of the victim were soon reduced to a bruised and battered pulp. Fian still didn’t confess even though the pain made him lose consciousness.

There was little pity. The fact that he had survived this brutal torture was seen simply as more proof of his guilt. It seemed unnatural that any human being could withstand such violence. It may have been Agnes Sampson or Gillie Duncan who suggested that Fian had cast a spell of his own and advised his mouth be examined. When the gaolers did as Agnes advised they found two pins pushed into the roof of his mouth. These had been inserted by Fian himself, it was believed, as a magic rite so that his senses would be numb to the pain being inflicted on his body. Remarkably, when the pins were removed Fian’s resolve evaporated and in front of the King he wrote a confession of his involvement with the North Berwick coven. It turned out that Fian was a key member of the coven and was held in high regard by Satan who appointed him as his secretary. He recorded the coven membership, issued oaths of obedience and passed on the Devil’s orders to his followers. He sat next to his master and walked beside him in their ritual ceremony, anticlockwise around the kirk graveyard, an act intended to cleanse the cemetery of its Christian sanctity. The fact that, as well as acting as secretary to the Devil, Fian held the same position with the Earl of Bothwell could hardly have escaped general notice. The implication was obvious. Indeed it was suggested that the Earl of Bothwell himself might be the figure who stood in the pulpit at North Berwick kirk and was the leader of the witches’ coven. It’s a view that has found favour among some right down to today.

Fian described how Satan had led the coven into the graveyard and, standing over a grave, bent a hand towards the ground which opened slowly by itself to reveal a fresh corpse. At a signal from the Devil the women among the coven pulled the body from its grave and hacked off the arms and legs. It was these limbs which were later used in the ceremony at Leith to sink the king’s ship.

Fian was placed in solitary confinement where events took place that were so strange that it raises questions of just exactly what transpired. Fian, it was reported, talked of ‘renouncing the Devil and all his works’ and vowed to ‘lead the life of a Christian’. He claimed that Satan had come to him in his cell during the night, dressed in black and carrying a white wand as a symbol of his authority. The Devil challenged Fian to keep faith with him ‘according to your first oath and promise’ and asked him to continue to be his follower as he was his most trusted servant. Fian, however, had had enough and retorted, ‘I have listened to you too much and because of this you have brought me down. I utterly forsake you!’ Satan’s chilling reply would surely have struck terror into any man’s heart. ‘Once you die’, Satan informed him coldly, ‘you shall be mine.’ Did Fian invent this conversation? Did he imagine it? Or was he, in fact, in communication with an entity from some realm outside this world? Fian himself appeared convinced that he was in thrall to some supernatural being. Should we doubt him?

Fian faced certain death, but who attempted to save him? During the night a key was passed into his cell and he not only walked from it without being seen but passed through the whole of Edinburgh Castle. His amazing escape was put down to the work of the Devil and if it was down to straightforward bribes no one seems to have been punished for it. But if human help was behind it who would risk involvement as they would immediately be tarred with the witchcraft brush? And Fian himself seems to have adopted a bizarre route once free. Instead of making himself scarce he headed straight back to Saltpans, an area where he could hardly escape being recognised. So why did he go there? Had he been freed to pass on a message? Was he on a mission to destroy incriminating evidence? Was he let out to perform a magic ritual of some kind? Or was it a trick to see if he would head for Crichton Castle?

The last seems unlikely as Fian was quickly recaptured, discovered, so it was said, in his own home, sitting at the table apparently unconcerned as to his fate. His attitude had changed dramatically which suggests that something had happened in the hours since he had escaped. He now denied any involvement with witchcraft and denounced his confession. Why he adopted this stance raises many questions. He had already admitted being a witch and so there was no chance he would escape a death sentence, and he must have known that he would face torture again to force him to confess. Back in prison he was chained to the ground while his nails were pulled from his fingers and sharp needles driven into the exposed flesh. His legs which had not healed from the previous battering, were put once more inside the Spanish boot and hit with a hammer. As the records state, ‘his legs were crushed and beaten together, as small as might be, and the bones and flesh so bruised that the blood and marrow spouted forth in great abundance. They were unserviceable forever.’ But, incredibly, John Fian still refused to confess. However, as he had admitted guilt earlier James believed that he could go on trial and an inevitable guilty verdict followed. On 13 January 1591, unable to walk, Fian was carried in a cart and strangled to death before his body was burnt.

At this point, it was certainly dangerous to have been too closely linked to Bothwell. Euphemia McLean was a known associate of the Earl and had been named by Gillie Duncan as one of the coven members. Evidence was presented that Euphemia had asked Agnes Sampson to help her to murder her father-in-law, John Moscrop. Agnes, for her part, had been charged with ‘making a wax figure of John Mocsrop, father-in-law to Euphemia McLean, at Euphemia’s request, for the destruction of John Moscrop.’ Agnes had taken the wax figure to a hill where by magic ritual she ‘raised the Devil’, who using his supernatural powers ‘confirmed the picture to serve for the destruction of John Moscrop.’ Having completed the ritual, Agnes delivered the wax image to Janet Drummond, servant to Euphemia, telling her to put it under John Moscrop’s bed. By black magic, Satan had imbued the figure with the ability to suck the life force from Moscrop and take it into itself. The wax figure could then be destroyed and its destruction would bring about Moscrop’s death. Here was the Devil, his followers, black magic ritual and murder all neatly brought together. The jury, however, refused to convict, but changed their mind after James threatened them. Euphemia was burnt alive.

Bothwell had already been arrested on 15 April 1591, and put in the castle gaol. To add to his problems, Ritchie Gordon, well known as a devotee of black magic, who had been burned to death at Edinburgh Cross in February, had confessed to preparing spells to kill the king at the request of the Earl. There seemed to be a pattern established. Bothwell was associating with known sorcerers with the aim of murdering James. The Earl denied it all, of course, but not trusting to justice escaped from the castle and managed to avoid all attempts at recapturing him. Interestingly, in a statement he issued denying any treasonable activities, he admitted associating with Ritchie Gordon and claimed that Ritchie, Sampson and Fian had been put to death because they had recanted their confession. In other words, he was the victim of a plot rather than the king. Bothwell clearly had allies and James was not able to act against him though he did not return to court till 1593. Was he, as some suspect, at the heart of a wider network of witches? James was so convinced of the reality of the Devil and his covens as a result of these events that he wrote his Demonology, published in 1597, arguing that ‘the assaults of Satan are most certainly practised and his servants [that is, witches] therefore merit most severely to be punished.’ Writers up to the present have been convinced that Bothwell was the ‘High Priest’ of an ancient religion and that he did indeed organise his followers into covens. His ‘witches’ went to their death while other coven leaders, individuals of high position, escaped and carried on practising in secret.

Bothwell’s status may have saved him from James’s wrath, but the Earl may have suffered from the past reputation of his family, especially that of his uncle, James, Earl of Bothwell, who had married Mary Queen of Scots. He too had a reputation as a witch and it was alleged that he had used magic spells to induce Mary to fall in love with him. Certainly, it is generally agreed that her infatuation with him bordered on the suicidal, and her marriage to him sealed her fate, sparking a rebellion which forced her to abandon her throne and leave Scotland forever. In fact, witchcraft was seen as a tool of the upper classes as they battled for control of Scotland. Janet Beaton, Lady Buccleuch, not only a friend but a mistress of Bothwell, was suspected of using witchcraft to help the Earl to take advantage of Mary. The Earl of Leslie and the Earl of Lennox, aristocratic ‘powerbrokers’ and advisers to the Crown both accused Bothwell of using secret magic rites in order to influence people. It was believed that Bothwell’s interest in black magic had been stimulated during the period that he was educated in France where, it was said, he spent most of his time reading up on sorcery and magic. It was alleged that Janet Beaton had the power to conjure up spirits and the ability to make them do what she wanted. A dangerous and double-edged weapon, as any true magician would warn the novice. But she survived it all, though her husbands were less fortunate. She went through four and married a fifth at the age of sixty-one. She seemed a timeless beauty which, of course, raised questions of just how she managed to keep her good looks. But Queen Mary herself was not free of the suspicion of using black magic. Margaret, Lady Atholl, one of her ladies-in-waiting, was spoken of openly as a woman who had studied magic with an expert — exactly with whom is unclear — and when Mary was giving birth to the future James VI had transferred, by ritual means, the pains Mary was experiencing to one of her helpers, the unfortunate Lady Reres.

Mary Queen of Scots would surely have advised her son, the future James VI, to be wary of secret covens of witches. She had direct experience of their work. Lord Ruthven, a leading noble during Mary’s reign, was suspected of being a warlock who regularly cast spells, though he used more direct tactics in murdering Rizzio, Mary’s Italian favourite. It was he who organised and led the band of killers into Mary’s apartment at Holyrood and took the lead in stabbing Rizzio to death right in front of her. Henry, Lord Darnley, Mary’s young husband, was certainly involved in the plot though he took no direct part in Rizzio’s death. It was because of this incident that Mary fell out with Darnley leading people to suspect that she planned his death in revenge. Black magic, of course, was believed to have been involved in this equally notorious, and still unsolved, murder.

The facts are simple. On the night of Sunday, 9 February 1567, while Henry, Lord Darnley lay ill at Kirk O’Field House, situated near South Bridge where the University now stands, a massive explosion took place which blew the building apart. Shortly afterwards Darnley was found dead in the grounds outside the house. His body did not have the appearance of someone who had been killed in an explosion. It looked as if he had been strangled and his body dumped outside. Why then had there been an attempt to blow up the house? Was it a ruse to conceal the murder? And was Mary involved?

The argument rages on to this day. There were some inexplicable aspects. How had it been possible to smuggle into the building which was by no means a large one, the many casks of gunpowder that would be needed to blow Kirk O’Field sky high? It wasn’t as if Darnley was alone, he had a whole retinue of servants, and the commotion made by bringing in a large pile of heavy gunpowder barrels could hardly have passed unnoticed. But somehow it had been done. Those in the know did, of course, have an answer. Bothwell had connived with the Queen to dispatch her unstable husband and he had used black magic to carry out the murder. Janet Beaton with her power over entities from other worlds had the gunpowder brought in silently. To make sure, however, Darnley had been killed separately by invisible fiends so that no one heard a sound.

After these epic sixteenth-century struggles between good and evil, which went to the very heart of upper-class society, why did witchcraft simply fade away? At the highest levels people stopped accusing each other of being members of a coven. But elsewhere witches appear to have been as active as ever. The life of Agnes Fynnie, who was charged with witchcraft in 1644, is a fascinating insight into the phenomenon of black magic at street level. Agnes, who lived in Potter Row, was suspected by her neighbours of using her dark powers to revenge herself on those who dared to cross her path. The young son of her neighbour, William Fairlie, passed by Agnes and made a comment to her. She was offended and made no secret of the fact. Soon after the boy became paralysed down his left side, was bedridden and quickly wasted away, dying within a week. The doctors who attended found that they could do nothing to help the lad and claimed that he had died because of some inexplicable supernatural event. Another neighbour, Beatrice Nisbet, was struck dumb, an affliction she attributed to Agnes’s powers of witchcraft. Janet Grinton, a trader in fish, also fell foul of Agnes after she sold the ‘witch’ a pair of herring that Agnes believed were not fresh. She took the fish back and demanded her money be returned, warning Janet that she would die soon. Shortly after Janet died as Agnes had predicted. The evidence against Agnes was mounting.

However, though people were afraid of Agnes’s powers, they also turned to her for help. John Buchan’s son was suffering from some kind of paralysis known at the time as ‘palsy’. Agnes visited the child advising the parents to leave the room and pray for the health of their son. However, when they returned they found their son’s condition had worsened dramatically and his paralysis was so bad that he was unable to move any part of his body. A large wound had appeared at the top of his right thigh which was ‘as wide as the palm of a hand as if a large chunk of meat had been hacked out of it.’ Was it believed that Agnes herself had done this? Even eaten it? Or had the Devil himself attacked the child? That may defy belief, but Agnes, faced with the parents’ suspicions, threatened, in retaliation, to summon up the Devil to take a bite out of Buchan’s wife. A week later the child died.

John Buchan accused Agnes of being a witch and threatened to pay her back for the death of his child. It was a rash if understandable act. That night he became ill and had a high fever but by the next day felt better; well enough in fact to warn Agnes that he intended to spread the news of her witching of his family round the whole town, unless she lifted the spell she had cast against them. As if by magic Buchan’s illness departed, but he eventually died of a mysterious complaint after falling out with Agnes again. The odd thing is that Buchan’s wife had been trying to buy a cake from Agnes on credit and was refused. This led to an argument. It was this dispute which led Agnes to cast a death spell on John Buchan in reprisal.

Agnes fell out with many individuals who soon after suffered some strange misfortune. Euphemia Kincaid argued with Agnes and called her a ‘witch.’ Agnes replied, coolly, that if this was the case then Euphemia’s family had better be careful. Soon after a wooden beam fell on Euphemia’s daughter and broke her leg. No one was safe from Agnes’s devilish power, it seemed.

She was even prepared to defy the law. Robert Watt, head of the Shoemaker’s union and a local magistrate, fined Agnes’s son-in-law John Purves for a breach of the peace. On hearing the news an enraged Agnes walked over to where the shoemakers were holding a meeting and hit Watt over the head. Was what happened next simply coincidence? Robert Watt’s business went into decline and nothing he could do seemed able to halt it. One day Agnes turned up at Robert’s house and reminded him bluntly of her assault. She warned him if he did not make up with her and her son-in-law his business would go bankrupt. Robert Watt threw in the towel and returned the fine John had been forced to pay. He also apologised. After that Watt’s business became as prosperous as before. No one saw that as pure chance.

The odd thing is that Agnes herself ran a general store of some kind and, in spite of her reputation, people seem to have used it so must have been aware of the risk they were taking. One of her customers, Christine Harlow, having ordered salt returned it with a message to Agnes that the amount she had received was far less than she’d paid for. Shortly after, Christine was taken ill. It seemed as if she would die so Agnes was sent for. The view was that Christine recovered after Agnes’s visit because ‘the witch had lifted the spell she had put on her.’

Her neighbours grew increasingly afraid of Agnes. John Cockburn fell out with Agnes’s daughter and was terrified when Agnes appeared in his bedroom one night. She had got into the house even though the windows and doors were bolted. There’s no evidence that Agnes took any action against him but such a supernatural appearance was enough to convince him that he was dealing with a witch. Margaret Williamson crossed Agnes and in reply Agnes openly called on the Devil to ‘blow her blind.’ Soon after Margaret became ill and lost the power of sight.

Faced with these displays of black magic the authorities must have felt they had little choice. Agnes was accused of having consulted with, and of having been, a follower of Satan for nearly thirty years. It was also claimed that she had herself boasted of being no ‘ordinary’ witch but a ‘grand, proud and noble’ witch. The evidence could hardly be denied and Agnes was strangled to death and her body burnt to ashes. Agnes’ life raises many questions. She clearly believed herself to possess strange powers. But was she deluded or did she, in fact, belong to some kind of strange cult? And was she really in touch with the Devil? Those who lived with her did not doubt it, nor did they dispute her supernatural abilities which she used for both good and evil.

Witchcraft has always been a double-edged sword, but in some cases there appears little good about it. When considering the events surrounding the case of Thomas Weir several key questions come to mind. Does his confession suggest that there was indeed a network of witches active in seventeenth-century Edinburgh? If there was a ‘Devil’ then just exactly what was he up to? But do some of the details admitted to by Weir suggest that we are dealing with an altogether more complex and radically different scenario?

Weir was an unlikely witch. He’d been a soldier and fought in the English Civil War in Ireland, on behalf of Parliament against Charles I. He appeared to be a committed Puritan and was believed to be so true to the faith that he was one of those appointed to guard the arch royalist John Graham, Marquis of Montrose, when he was executed in the capital in May 1650. Weir went down in history as the man who notoriously blew pipe smoke in John Graham’s face as he went to the scaffold. But history was to be kinder to John Graham than Thomas Weir as events were to show. Weir, however, was held in high esteem and became Captain of the Edinburgh City Guard. He also took up preaching and earned a reputation as a devout man who visited the homes of leading men of the city to pray alone with their wives. No one had a bad word to say about him or any suspicion that Weir was not what he appeared to be. And he might have carried on with his bizarre double life if, for unknown reasons, he had not suddenly experienced a crisis of conscience. Or so he claimed.

Out of the blue in front of a group of friends he blurted out that for fifty years he had been a servant of Satan. But he did not stop there and began detailing, to anyone who would listen, a shocking and sordid story. He confessed not only to having regular sex with his sister, Grizelle, with whom he admitted he had lived as man and wife, but also with the wives and daughters of leading city members; the ones the trusting men folk had willingly allowed Weir to visit to give spiritual comfort. Many of the men involved were personal friends of his.

And he also claimed to have visited several women in the middle of the night. He had managed to gain secret entry to their bedrooms through occult powers given to him by his master the Devil. Weir confessed that Satan had given him a magic staff which not only made him invisible, but enabled him to get inside people’s houses. In this manner, he had made his way into the houses of women he knew and had sex with them while their husbands slept by their side. It seemed an outrageous claim and people at first were disbelieving. It was also not clear whether or not the women involved had been active participants in these sexual encounters or whether they were put into some kind of trance and were unaware of Weir’s presence. No women would admit to voluntary sex with Weir but the thought that he’d engaged in such activity without his victim being aware of it was disturbing and frightening. Even more bizarre was Weir’s claim that he had engaged in sexual intercourse with a horse in a farmer’s field. The man’s sanity was doubted and his confessions were ignored. The general hope was that he would somehow come to his senses and events would blow over.

But the opposite happened. Weir insisted that what he admitted was absolutely true. To the perceptive it began to dawn that perhaps Weir was sending out a warning, alerting people to the entity which he now felt he had allowed to control, and ruin, his life. But as Weir kept talking it was realised that the only solution, as it was growing into a city scandal, was to lock him in the Tolbooth and charge him with witchcraft.

This only served to increase Weir’s self-denunciation. And worse was to follow. Grizelle Weir, his sister, now came forward to back up Thomas’s story. She confirmed that they had both met with Satan, become his servants and engaged in the various sexual activities her brother had confessed to. The authorities were left with little choice. Both Thomas and Grizelle were put on trial. And here one more curious twist emerges. The charges of witchcraft against Weir were dropped and he was charged instead with ‘incest, sodomy and bestiality.’ He could hardly deny it. Found guilty he was executed, going willingly to his death. Grizelle, on the other hand, was executed on the grounds of having consulted with ‘witches, necromancers and devils.’

Naturally, the different way in which Thomas was dealt with, compared to Grizelle, aroused suspicion. As Thomas had been the one to come forward and confess to being a witch why had he escaped that indictment? It was understandable that those with whom he had worked and been friendly with might not want to be tarred with the same brush. But was there more to it than that? Could there have been a coven involving several leading men of the city? It seemed a reasonable question, especially as rumours swept Edinburgh that Weir had been allowed to escape the gallows and a mental patient, a look-alike, had been substituted at the scaffold. Soon after, several witnesses claimed to have seen him walking the villages of the Lothians still grasping the stick gifted him by Satan.

So how much was simply the product of Weir’s twisted mind? Sex with a horse seems at first to be the confession of a deranged mind. However, this strange act was part of an ancient pagan rite. The Kings of Ulster in ancient times ritually copulated with a mare to achieve long life. A horse was regarded as a sacred animal by ancient pagan cults and contact with a horse, and parts of a horse, as used in ritual magic are still seen today as bestowing certain psychic gifts. Most strange of all, however, is Weir’s claim about how he travelled around the capital. According to him, the Devil possessed a ‘flying chariot’. This was undoubtedly a nuts-and-bolts machine which spurted flame as it travelled across the skies. The Devil sent it to Weir to carry him to their meetings. And this happened, according to Weir, in broad daylight. This must rank as the most bizarre of all his strange admissions. A ‘UFO’ mixed up in witchcraft? Admittedly, it fails to make much sense and raises some very disturbing questions. But why would Weir invent such a story? Can we really accept that some alien entity set out deliberately to corrupt Weir and others? What would be the point of such an act? Maybe we have to admit that many of the actions of ghosts, poltergeists and other entities encountered in the city do seem to serve no purpose whatsoever. Maybe there simply isn’t one.

Thomas Weir’s revelations were the last great flurry of witchcraft in the city. Belief in the power of witches seemed to disappear and the acts against witchcraft were repealed in 1736. But it created another mystery. What happened to witchcraft between the ending of the witch trials and the twentieth century, when witchcraft underwent a revival and came out into the open? Some suggest that it never really disappeared. It just went underground. The suspicion is that, at the top of society, witchcraft was as thriving and as active as it had been at the time of King James VI. The upper classes simply kept quiet about their involvement in witch covens and, to make their activities even more secure, they ridiculed and got rid of laws against witchcraft. Now they could carry on their secret activities with no fear of prosecution. What re-emerged in the twentieth century was witchcraft at street level as the wider public began to rediscover ancient practices that were once part and parcel of daily life. It was not, however, without danger for the participants as our ancestors knew only too well. The dark side of the covens was about to be learnt all over again.

By the 1990s, witchcraft was thriving in the capital. It was claimed that there had been a rapid growth in the number of witches in Edinburgh, with nearly twenty active covens and for those involved it, no doubt, formed a harmless and even enjoyable new approach to living. But some found there was a less welcoming side.

Through my involvement in investigating the paranormal, I came into contact with several members of Wiccan covens. Most were at pains to explain the benefits and peaceful nature of modern witchcraft. I didn’t for a moment doubt their sincerity. A few, however, had some distinctly strange tales to tell. Gordon had certainly experienced a series of bizarre incidents while a member of a city coven. He first called me in 2002 and we met a number of times in various cafés during which he told me of the time he spent as a coven member. Gordon, in fact, was no dyed-in-the-wool Wiccan. In fact, he had drifted into coven membership through his girlfriend who had a long-time interest in the subject. At first, Gordon found the experience of attending coven meetings stimulating and not at all threatening. Gatherings took place in individual houses and he found the ritual aspects intriguing and even enjoyable. He laughed:



There was no animal sacrifice or naked women on altars. None of the stuff you see in the films. There was a ‘priest’ with a cloak and we chanted while he lit candles and carried out ritual movements just things like that. To be honest it seemed quite harmless. There was plenty of chat and it was all very friendly.’



But after a few months things started to change. Gordon explained:



We started meeting out of doors in spots well away from the public. Now we were expected to take our clothes off and spells were worked up against certain things and then particular individuals. It all started getting very intense. There seemed to be rivalry between the coven I was in and another group of witches. I felt it was getting a bit nasty.



Gordon was to learn just how nasty it could be when he fell out with the coven leader and, at the same time, drifted away from his girlfriend. He said:



I made some comments about not liking the way the coven was going and at the same time I was breaking up with my girlfriend. A member of the coven I’d got quite friendly with warned me to be careful, but I just laughed it off.



Within a couple of weeks Gordon began to wonder if he had been right to take it so lightly. He explained:



As I was walking home from work to the flat I rented on the south side, one evening in late October, I glimpsed a shadowy figure which seemed to be darting in and out of doorways opposite me but slightly behind me. I thought it must be a trick of the light at first. But then it happened a few days later when I was coming back from town after a night out and I was following a different route. What I kept catching sight of was simply a dark, human-shaped figure, but it seemed to vanish as soon as I tried to look directly at it. It made me nervous and I put it down to imagination, but it happened several times after that. But the incident that really freaked me took place in my flat. I got up to go to the toilet during the night. As I walked along the hall I caught sight of the shadowy figure. This time it was quite clear in that I could see it was wearing a dark cloak down to the floor and the head was covered by a hood. But the really frightening thing was that I could see a face. It was a man’s, very white and scowling. I admit I shrieked in terror and the figure vanished. I stayed up all night with the lights on.



Gordon did not know what to make of it but was sure it wasn’t all in his mind. He said:



I contacted the coven member I’d been friendly with. I’ll call him ‘Atremis’. Atremis agreed to see me as long as I kept quiet about it. He was nervous too. He told me that the coven leader was angry with me for speaking out and abandoning the coven. He was sending his spirit phantom to warn me not to reveal anything about the coven and to make sure I kept in line. Atremis gave me advice about rituals to use to keep the spirit phantom out of my flat. I did what Atremis advised and I didn’t see the shadowy figure in the flat again, but it didn’t leave me completely for several weeks as I saw it on a number of occasions when I walked home. I can understand people thinking I’m a fantasist, but until these things happened I had no belief in the power of witchcraft. Now I’m not so sure. I’ve kept well away from the covens ever since.



Gordon’s is certainly a strange story for twenty-first century Scotland and it may all be down to the power of suggestion. It’s well known that if a person starts to believe in the power of magic, and Gordon may have done so without being conscious of it, then the mind can start to imagine that it is being threatened by all manner of things. Gordon may have worried about falling out with the coven and his mind did the rest. But witches themselves would have no doubt that Gordon could have been the victim of a psychic attack.

In the late 1990s I met Dougie, a High Priest of a ‘White Wiccan’ coven, deeply immersed in the rites and belief of what he saw as an ancient religion. He most definitely represented those in the Wiccan community who see their religion as beneficial both to the individual and society. But even Dougie was not free from risk. Opposed to Satanism he found himself on the wrong side of those still following the teachings of the ‘Great Beast’, the notorious Black Magician, Aleister Crowley. To show their displeasure these disciples of the dark side sent a warning in the form of a bizarre entity called a ‘gollum’. A gollum is created by black magicians using soil from an ancient graveyard. By means of strange rituals the black magicians resurrect the outward form of a dead person, which is then imbued with the power of an evil spirit and sent to terrify those they believe need to be taught a lesson. Dougie had been the victim of just such an attack. He told me of the terrifying night he had spent crouched in a corner of his New Town flat with the gollum standing over him. It was only when the sun rose that the attack came to an end. Dougie had managed to defeat the power of the gollum by using his athame, a sacred knife consecrated by Wiccan ritual, to prevent the gollum sucking the life force from his body. It was certainly a warning bell and Dougie took note. He explained that to protect his flat he had to’ ritually block all entry points to the building so evil spirits can’t enter.’

In the 1980s, I was friendly with a leading Wiccan at a time when witchcraft was just re-emerging from the shadows. Barry gave me an interesting account of how Wiccan magic works. He told me:



In Wicca we believe that spirit guides can, and do, assist us with all forms of magic to change someone’s mind about something. For example, some person is refusing to sell a house to a Wiccan couple who have offered a fair price.



According to Barry the spirit people would work to change the mind of those refusing to sell, provided that those buying were being fair. That on its own does not appear threatening and those like Barry would only deal with the spirit people on the basis of avoiding harm. But what of those who would contact spirits and demons for less benign purposes and use them to carry out acts of revenge? There certainly seems to be two sides to witchcraft and Gordon and Dougie appear to have been the victims of a strange power that most people would steer well clear of.

Certainly times have changed. In October 2004 the Royal Navy officially allowed a non-commissioned officer from Edinburgh to call himself a Satanist and practise his rituals on-board ship. This followed what was called ‘Scotland’s first legal white witch wedding’, a ceremony held in a vault in the Old Town in September 2004. There’s no doubt that this reflected a growing attraction to ‘alternative’ religions. But is there more to it than that? The issue today, as it was in the time of James VI, concerns the extent to which witchcraft has gone right to the top of society. Are those who make the rules, enforce the laws, or run large institutions involved in black magic? Or even Satanism? These people are unlikely to step forward and admit to being members of a coven. And it has to be said that I have never seen any direct evidence of the involvement of any public figure. Rumours though persist and I have been given accounts of covens gathering on remote hill sites deep in the heart of the Pentlands, attended by those who could, but would rather not, be recognised. The ability to carry out acts, good or evil, by supernatural means attracts a certain type of individual, as it has always done. The prospect that one might be able to contact other entities, or even the Devil, and enter into realms other than our own seems for some an opportunity too good to miss. And, of course, unlike witches of old no one today faces the prospect of gaol or death for being a follower of the ‘horned god’.





4


Blood Lust of the Undead


Did ever a capital city boast a more weird thoroughfare than Edinburgh’s Princes Street? Ghosts, fairies, UFOs, the Devil and entities which defy description have all appeared along its route. But can it really be the haunt of vampires? An event at the turn of the twentieth century suggests that this most frightening of beings is no stranger to the city streets. The witness to the bizarre incident was twenty-three-year-old Geoffrey Anderson. He recalled:



On 23 November, I was about to cross from the corner of Princes Street into Hanover Street. At the other corner, opposite a large shop, stood a horse and carriage. The horse was turned towards me and about twenty yards away. Suddenly from the gutter, where it falls into the drain, rose a vague black shape about four feet long and two and a half feet high, but without any visible legs. It was shaped like an hour-glass and moved like a huge caterpillar towards the horse, about fifteen feet off. The movement was very rapid. It sprang to the throat of the animal, clung there like a limpet for an instant and disappeared. The horse, in evident terror, reared violently straight up, throwing out his hoofs as if to strike something. A passer-by went to its head and I succeeded in quieting the terrified creature. The streets were brilliantly lit with electric light and the shop windows rendered the illumination greater. I cannot account for the appearance. My mind was occupied with simple everyday objects of no great moment.



The description of this strange beast, although different from the flesh-and-blood being we would usually associate with a vampire, does reveal one of the characteristic traits of this entity. It went straight for the horse’s neck, clearly seeking to draw sustenance from the blood flowing there. Vampires, in any case, can take on many forms and the ability of the vampire to change shape is one of its hallmark traits.

Vampires, if they ever went away, have certainly made a comeback in the twenty-first century with a host of television appearances, such as in Bufffy the Vampire Slayer, and in films, such as New Moon part of the Twilight saga. It all seems like harmless thrills, but, inevitably, there is a darker side, and a price to be paid.

In October 2003, twenty-two-year-old Allan Menzies claimed that he had achieved his ambition of becoming a vampire following his killing of Thomas McKendrick in Fauldhouse, West Lothian. Menzies, obsessed with vampire films, told the High Court in Edinburgh, where he was on trial for murder, that he attacked Thomas McKendrick, aged twenty-one, after he insulted one of the characters in the adult-rated film, Queen of the Damned, a 2002 film adaption of a novel in Anne Rice’s Vampire Chronicles series. It was a film that fascinated Menzies to such an extent that he had watched it over a hundred times. A key character in the film is the female vampire ‘Akasha’, played by the US singer Aaliyah. Menzies claimed that Akasha regularly visited his bedroom at night and they passed the time talking about the vampire world. It was during these ‘chats’, that Menzies realised that he wished to become a vampire and live with Akasha. When he confided his secret wish to her, Akasha told him that he could only achieve immortality and become a real vampire if he killed someone.

Was Menzies waiting for an opportunity to turn Akasha’s words into reality? It seems likely as what happened next could hardly be described as coincidence. According to Menzies, Thomas McKendrick made insulting remarks about Akasha, calling her a ‘black bitch.’ What really infuriated Menzies, however, was the fact that his beloved vampire was standing beside him at the time. In Menzies’ eyes she was a real person who had been offended by Thomas’s words. He demanded that Thomas apologise which he did, but saying to Menzies at the same time, ‘You can’t believe in vampires.’ But Menzies really did and Thomas’s words enraged him. Grabbing a hammer, he chased Thomas upstairs where he battered him about the head. Leaving his victim unable to move and probably dying, Menzies went downstairs and took out a knife and a cup from the kitchen. He then slashed Thomas Mckendrick’s throat, catching the spurting blood with the cup. He then drank it, filled it again and drank a second time. But that was by no means the end of the bizarre and horrific series of events. Menzies claimed that he broke off and ate a portion of McKendrick’s skull. He had become now, he said, the character ‘Vamp.’ In court, Menzies was asked, ‘Are you telling us that you now believe you are a vampire?’ He replied, ‘Yes.’ ‘And do you believe that you will gain immortality? Again Menzies replied, ‘Yes.’

Whether or not Menzies truly believed that ‘Akasha’ was in communication with him and that he had become a vampire by drinking human blood is unclear. It was seen by some as an attempt to influence the jury into believing that he was not wholly in his right mind when he murdered McKendrick. But what is clear is that the idea and attraction of vampirism is today a powerful motif, one that undoubtedly exercises a strong influence on certain minds. Allan Menzies was, and is, not alone in believing that he could turn himself into a vampire. In Germany, Daniel Ruda and his wife Manuela murdered Frank Hackert in 2001. Hackert was killed as a sacrifice so that the Rudas could prove that they had become vampires and were worthy of acceptance into vampire hell. What is equally chilling is that the couple claimed to have learned about vampirism, and had conceived the idea that they could become vampires, during the time that they had spent living in Scotland. It isn’t clear exactly who was instructing them and it was suspected that the couple were, in fact, trying to conceal the names of those they had been in contact with during the years they had lived here. It can be guessed why.

One other factor should be considered in the Menzies and Ruda cases. Did some weird being enter our world and set out to twist each of their minds and so encourage them to carry out unspeakable acts? Menzies claimed that Akasha had an almost physical presence. Weird though that undoubtedly seems, in a sense it is no more strange than a host of bizarre entities people have claimed to have encountered, just more disturbing. If individuals meet with goblins, fairies, ghosts and aliens is that any different, in essence, from being faced with a being claiming to be a vampire? Allan Menzies was found guilty of murder and sentenced to a minimum of eighteen years in prison. But, in November 2004, he was found dead in in Shotts prison having succeeded in hanging himself. It was a mystery how he managed it. Or had Akasha, or whoever was claiming to be Akasha, returned to claim him for the vampire world, just as she had promised?

In her book, Vampire Nation, writer Arlene Russo highlights the fact that we should not consider ‘the vampire’ but rather ‘vampirism’, as there are different types of vampires. Some are not afraid of sunlight and the drive to turn others into the ‘undead’ through sucking their blood is by no means a universal trait. In the folklore of some countries, people became vampires in a variety of ways and do not have to be bitten by a vampire to be turned into one. However, there are certain characteristics which, to my mind, define the creature. True vampires can only be those who having died have risen again and who then sustain their activities through sucking the blood or devouring the flesh of a living human being. There are those today who claim to be vampires though they have never experienced death. I would suggest that this group do not classify as ‘real’ vampires, whatever else they may be. Nor would the true vampire, as some do today, advertise their activities as, though they may have control over their thoughts, they are driven by the irresistible compulsion to, literally, live off other people. They cannot, therefore, by their very nature, walk the streets announcing their vampirism although they may secretly associate with fellow vampires. The type of life a vampire leads has to be concealed as, otherwise, they would most certainly find their ‘lifestyle’ curtailed. If vampires once existed they may still do so today, but, rest assured, they won’t be inviting you to a public house to discuss their way of life, or try to convince you that beneath it all they are really ‘normal’ people. In any case, an entity which owes its existence to some type of paranormal origin should, in my view, be treated warily, no matter what others may suggest.

But vampires on the streets of Edinburgh? Whenever we think of such a being our minds surely turn to the mountains and distant valleys of Eastern Europe, faraway places like Transylvania and the like. Strangely, however, the writer we most associate with vampirism, Bram Stoker, whose iconic novel, Dracula has created a lasting impression was moved to write his book after visiting Slaines Castle on Scotland’s east coast, north of Aberdeen. Certainly it is a haunting place and few who visit it can come away without being affected by its brooding presence. But Stoker does not appear to have connected Scotland to the activities of the vampire. Instead, he looked to Eastern Europe and set up a link to the origin of this beast which has firmly burned itself on our consciousness.

All of which is rather strange because, in past centuries, it was Scotland rather than the east of Europe which was seen as a hotbed of vampire activity. And, indeed, there are numerous instances from across the land, which suggest belief in, and the actions of, a vampire. Edinburgh did not escape their presence and, pulling back years of accumulated misinterpretation, we can see just how strong the vampire motif was present.

Once we start to take the idea of the vampire seriously, previously unexplained incidents can be seen in a different light. William Christie Miller, who died in 1848, was the last in line of a Quaker family. His father and grandfather had been amazingly successful businessmen whose ability to turn a profit was the talk of the city. Having inherited the family fortune, William enjoyed a luxurious lifestyle, living on a large estate in Craigentinny. But for someone who had everything to live for William was seen as a rather strange character. He lived a solitary life and did not marry. His main interest was his library. He gathered a vast number of books, many dealing with the occult, and was said to spend much of his time researching a variety of bizarre subjects, though exactly what remains a mystery. And, of course, it could simply be the sort of rumour which can arise when a wealthy person keeps himself to himself and lives his life away from the public gaze. He was an odd-looking figure, very thin with spindly limbs and a high voice. He was, it was said, also completely hairless. But strange though his behaviour appeared in life, in death he left an even greater mystery. William Miller left strict instructions in his will that he had to be buried at night and most definitely not during the hours of daylight.





The mausoleum where William Christie’s grave lies. Why did he insist on being buried forty feet underground?

Miller could not hide the fact that he was having a tomb built for his body after death. Indeed, it hardly seemed remarkable that a rich man would chose to do anything else. But what people would have wondered at, had it been general knowledge, was that beneath the monument to mark the site of his grave a shaft had been dug into the ground which was over forty feet deep, many times deeper than necessary for a normal burial. Even stranger for a religious man of the period, he ordered that the tomb must be dug on open land and not in a churchyard. Secret instruction, it was claimed, had been given to his solicitor that his coffin must be made of lead, sealed completely and placed at the very bottom of the shaft. In a final touch, a stone slab several inches thick was placed over the coffin. It can surely be stated with some certainty that Miller did not want anyone to have easy access to his body.

The marble mausoleum which surmounts Miller’s grave boasts some remarkable scenes of a religious type, including ‘The overthrow of the pharaoh in the Red Sea’ and ‘The Song of Miriam and Moses’. These obviously meant something to Miller though exactly what is not clear. Both designs refer to the swamping of the pharaoh’s army while crossing the Red Sea as they pursued the fleeing Moses, so there is in both a connection with Ancient Egypt, in which Miller was interested, and a more general lesson of good triumphing over evil. There may well be a deeper and hidden meaning, but it awaits discovery. The mausoleum still stands, its brooding presence dominating a row of pre-war bungalows on Craigentinny Crescent.

But did Miller rest in peace? Rumours claiming to explain the real reasons for the strange burial swept the city. It was said that Miller was overly worried about the possible action of bodysnatchers and that, as a wealthy man, he was more likely than most to be a target of these gruesome gangs. But even if that were true the precautions he took seemed, to others, extreme. A more perceptive view expressed by some, held that Miller had something to hide. Could that have been some bizarre family secret? Was Miller terrified that he might rise again from his tomb? Turn into something unspeakable? Even arise as one of the undead? It seems unlikely and sceptics have drawn attention to the fact that Miller asked that his coffin be sealed thoroughly which suggests, if anything, that he was more afraid of something getting in rather than getting out. Unless, of course, he was anxious to ensure that he himself did not emerge from the casket. And, in any case, vampires have, as do all supernatural entities, the ability to pass through solid matter; a characteristic remarked on since time immemorial.

However, it might be wrong to dismiss it all as a flight of fancy. An incident from the 1940s, suggests that whatever lay at the root of Miller’s behaviour something strange was going on at his grave. Bill McDonald, a former policeman, relates how one night a colleague was patrolling along the street where Miller’s memorial stands when he noticed that the door on the memorial was open. He had patrolled the area regularly so realised at once that it should be shut and that clearly something was ‘not right’. Switching on his torch he edged inside then shone the beam down the deep shaft. At the very bottom he glimpsed a figure moving around. The shock was too much and, not waiting to learn more, he rapidly exited the chamber slamming the door shut behind him. Had something got out, or was something trying to get into, or re-enter, Miller’s grave? Or was it all simply a trick of the light?

Vampires are notoriously elusive. Encounters are infrequent and to get a broader view of the activities of these entities, and what they might be up to in the city, it’s useful to gather information from incidents from a number of sites not too far away. In Melrose some time ago a priest had become notorious for his behaviour, especially over a series of sexual liaisons. When he died his phantom was seen wandering about the town although it appeared more substantial and solid than a simple apparition. And so it turned out as one night when the priest went into the bedroom of a local woman and attacked her, with quite obvious sexual intent. She recognised him and as she described it he was not like any ‘spirit’ she could have imagined and had become almost like a living being again. She survived the assault only because her screams attracted attention. But there was general concern that he was likely to attack again so it was agreed to keep watch over the priest’s grave. They didn’t have to wait long as, on the following night, the priest rose from the ground as if alive again. He immediately attacked those at his graveside and they defended themselves eventually sinking an axe into the priest’s chest. He sank back into his grave, but as it was still dark it was felt that it would be safer to wait till daylight before taking further action. When they opened the priest’s coffin the next day his body looked quite fresh, not that of a dead man. They could plainly see the blood still flowing from the axe wound. They took him out and burned his body to ashes; the most sensible way to deal with such a creature.

Some miles further east, a community experienced an equally bizarre attack. During the time that Berwick on Tweed was ruled by Scottish kings it was terrorised by a strange creature; a man who had died, but who had come back to life again. According to a report of the time:



After he was buried he used to, at night, emerge from his grave and rush up and down the streets of the town. Anyone who met him was terrified and nobody wanted to step outside their house till daybreak when the creature returned to his coffin.



Eventually it was agreed that the situation could not be allowed to continue. A group of people came together and went to the grave. They dug up the body, cut it into bits then burned the whole lot in a furnace. This ‘living corpse’ had the characteristics of a vampire though there was no evidence that it was feeding on the blood of the living — the traditional hallmark of the undead.

But other incidents make it clear that a supply of blood was believed to be an essential ingredient in resurrecting the dead. In the Dumfriesshire town of Annan a dead man, even though interred with Christian rites, rose from the grave to torment the town. An eyewitness of the time reported that: ‘going out from his tomb in the night time he used to wander through the streets and around the houses from the fall of darkness to the rising of the sun.’ Two brothers decided to deal with the creature and went to the spot where he was buried. They expected to have to dig deep to reach his body, but were surprised to find that he was lying not far from the surface. The corpse was swollen and the face red as if it had been gorging on blood. And, indeed, when they started hacking at the body, fresh blood ran from the wounds, evidence that the vampire had been feeding on the living, though it was unclear exactly who his victims had been. The body was dismembered and the pieces thrown on a bonfire. The only way to ensure that a vampire would cause no more trouble was to destroy completely its physical body.

An encounter close to the Scottish border with England also suggests that we are dealing with a flesh-and-blood entity and brings us closer to the present era. In the village of Croglin, in the latter part of the nineteenth century, a woman was attacked one night by a strange-looking creature with a brown face and flaming eyes. The creature bit her on the throat, but ran off when she screamed. Some months later it appeared again at her window and her brother shot it in the leg. They watched it disappear over the churchyard wall into a family vault. When the vault was opened they found a brown, mummified figure in a coffin, with a recent gunshot wound to the leg.

In the nineteenth century, in Forfar, following the death of her boyfriend, his fiancée insisted on being buried beside him in a double coffin. A few days after the burial she ordered that the grave be opened and lowered herself inside, determined that she would stay with her beloved’s corpse even though she was still alive and healthy.

She had dressed herself in white like a bride going to a wedding, but must have known that death awaited her. Not long after people walking through woods close to the graveyard claimed to see a white-gowned female hovering among the trees waving and beckoning to them. It was believed that the young woman had guessed that her boyfriend was a vampire and decided that she had to be reunited with him, even if this meant allowing him her own blood and becoming herself a vampire in the process. Now, of course, they both needed fresh victims to sustain themselves.

A bizarre tale from Strathy, though it involves the wife of a minister, is suggestive of the resurrection of the ‘living corpse’. The woman, dead and laid out in the living room, was viewed by many people. She appeared quite lifeless, though in death she still managed to look young and attractive. The woman was buried, but local thieves decided to raid the grave and steal the rings she had been interred with. On the same night as the funeral they opened the lair and took off the coffin lid. But as they worked, the corpse started to move. The men took off. In the account it seems that the woman returned to her husband covered in blood. She remained alive for many years and even had children. So what had been the fate of the two thieves who, apparently, disappeared without trace? The implication is that, in reality, she had feasted on their blood in order to come back to life. Items of value had been buried with her and talked about openly, probably in order to encourage thieves to visit the graveside. If known wrongdoers vanished, there would be few to worry about their fate. But there is, of course, a puzzle. How did the woman sustain herself thereafter? Was there more secret bloodletting? Or does the evidence imply that she needed only one quantity of fresh blood to bring her back to life? This is not the behaviour of the traditional vampire as we know it, but there may be, for all we know of the nature of this creature, a variety of types, some of which may need only the occasional intake of blood to maintain their bizarre existence.

These reports from across Scotland suggest a widespread tradition of vampire encounters. But Scotland also had a theme more in keeping with the modern view of the vampire phenomenon, as depicted in several films. These were women who dressed in long, flowing, green dresses. Attractive and seductive, they would lure young men to them and sink their sharp teeth into their flesh, sucking the blood of their victims. They were, in reality, old hags who maintained their youthful looks by consuming the blood of the young people they seduced and attacked. They did not usually kill their victims, but left severe wounds on their necks and shoulders, wounds that would not heal, though their victims do not appear to have turned into vampires themselves. These women, known as Boabhan Sith, could be kept away by the presence of a horse.

However, though these incidents are strong evidence of a vampire tradition and presence they are, it has to be said, incidents from more rural locations; spots where a vampire could easily slip into the night or where sheer isolation may over stimulate the imagination. But what about the ‘undead’ stalking the streets of Scotland’s ancient capital? The mind does find it hard to adjust to the idea, but several incidents lead to the inevitable conclusion that the tradition of vampirism lurks not too far beneath the surface. And the incident of the Edinburgh butcher who allegedly saw an apparition of his wife can surely be seen in a different light when the characteristics of the vampire are taken into consideration. The tradition goes that the man’s wife died mysteriously while in her early thirties, leaving her husband with a young family to take care of. He was still a young man himself and, naturally, began to look around for female companionship which he found with a neighbour or two. One evening, while he was sitting in his flat speaking to a female friend, he glanced up at the window and saw an apparition of his wife standing at the window watching him. But it was an apparition of the strangest kind as it appeared solid with a waxy-hued face and trailing burial clothes, as if it had just emerged from the grave. The butcher was terrified by the encounter and stayed away from the house for several days. When he returned he was again confronted by a sighting of his dead wife at the window staring at him. The next sequence of events is unclear. The butcher fell into some kind of unexplained illness during which the life force seemed to drain slowly from him and he grew gradually more pale. It has been claimed that strange marks appeared on his body, but there is no clear description of where they were located or what they looked like. Bite marks of a resurrected vampire? One who wanted her husband to join her as one of the undead? It can only be speculation, but there is certainly more to this tale than is obvious at first glance. To put it down as simply another haunting ignores the more sinister aspects to the event.

The same applies to the bizarre series of events surrounding the death of Sir James Stanfield. On 20 November 1686, Stanfield’s body was seen floating on the River Tyne in East Lothian by John Topping, who claimed to be just passing through the district. However, Topping later reported that Stanfield’s son Philip was standing on the river bank simply watching the body drift by and making no effort to pull him from the water. He also denied to Topping that he had recognised the corpse. In fact, Philip went to the home of his father’s friend, a minister, John Bell, and asked him if he knew where his father was. This was clearly strange behaviour as he had seen the body in the river and Topping knew that he had been there. It seems obvious that for some reason Philip wanted to be absolutely sure that Stanfield was dead, regardless of whether or not he was himself implicated in his father’s death. It begs the question:Why? Was there something about his father which worried him so much that he was careless about his own life? Events would shortly reveal more strange aspects to the affair. Soon after Philip’s meeting with John Bell, Stanfield’s body was discovered and fished from the river. It seems that John Topping had failed to report his sighting of the body and, in another odd twist, it appears he was never properly questioned on the matter. It may, in fact, have made little difference to the fate of James Stanfield whether or not he was pulled from the river. Stanfield had, in fact, been murdered, though Philip seemed anxious to deny it and swore that his father had simply drowned in a tragic accident.

With his father’s body back in the house, Philip began to act in a rash and bizarre way. He ransacked his father’s private rooms as if looking for something, then burned books and documents. At some point during the night he went to an outhouse where his father’s body was lying, took it out and buried it in a local churchyard. If Philip had set out to attract attention he could not have gone about it in a more obvious way. It seems clear that he was out to hide something. But what could it have been?

In Edinburgh, where the family was well known and connected, concern grew that Sir James had died an unnatural death. The Lord Advocate ordered Stanfield’s body to be exhumed and examined. On Monday, 30 November, Sir James’s body was removed from the ground and taken into the church. A post-mortem was carried out, but it’s obvious that the whole event had been stage-managed to carry out a bizarre test. Philip was ordered to touch his father’s body. As he placed his hand as instructed blood gushed from the left side of Stanfield’s neck. Philip staggered back in shock and those gathered round were just as stunned by what they had witnessed. They had every reason to be amazed as it is physically impossible for blood to flow from a dead person. Even in those far-off days that fact was well known. And James Stanfield had, by now, been dead for several days. All of which suggests that either everyone had made a terrible mistake and Stanfield was still somehow alive, which goes against all the recorded facts, or, just as weird, some strange transformation had taken place in Stanfield which had reactivated his corpse. Had he been turned into a vampire? In which case, the blood that poured from him would have been the blood he had sucked from the victims he had gorged on. But in that case there would be, it would be thought, evidence of attacks on individuals in the area and there is nothing in the records I have been able to discover that would link obviously to vampire attacks. However, maybe Stanfield was in the process of transformation or any assaults had been carried out further away. Or maybe the rumours at the time that Stanfield had been some kind of blood-sucking beast were way off the mark.

But there are other aspects of the case that require explanation. At his trial in February 1688, at the High Court in the city, Philip was accused of strangling his father. However, as the post-mortem had shown there was a wound of some kind on Stanfield’s neck out of which blood had flowed. So how had that got there? Had Stanfield been the victim of a separate attack of some kind? The issue was ignored. People were puzzled, but no one enquired too deeply. But the way that Philip was dealt with raised further question marks over this whole strange affair. Found guilty after a three-day trial he was sentenced to death. After his death, however, the authorities refused to allow his body to be buried. Oddly, it was secretly cut down and found floating in the water in a nearby pond, in an echo of the circumstances in which his father’s body had been discovered. Was this someone’s idea of justice or some sort of strange ceremony intended to ‘cleanse’ the body or nullify some evil, in the same way that witches, it is said, were unable to survive immersion in running water? It’s odd too that his tongue and right hand were cut off. What was this meant to signify? Philip’s body then disappeared and was never found. Had Philip, too, become one of the undead and found a secret hiding place? Or had someone set out to make sure that Philip Stanfield could never rise again and so obliterated his remains for all time? Whether or not the Stanfield clan were a family of vampires, it’s interesting that the tradition of the blood-sucking ‘undead’ was well established at the time.

In fact, it might be thought that Bram Stoker, who was a regular visitor to Scotland, had no need to travel as far as Slaines Castle for inspiration. There was plenty happening in and around Edinburgh to raise his curiosity. And who knows … maybe it did. There’s a report about events in a house in Inverleith, owned by William Brien, which certainly are suggestive of a vampire presence. Brien lived alone in a large house of ten rooms and was never seen to go out during the day. No one seemed to visit him apart from a cleaner who called from time to time. He was a mystery man and the enigma deepened on his death. All the neighbours saw was a coffin being removed from the house by undertakers they did not recognise, then taken to a destination that was not revealed. Equally as puzzling were the actions of William’s cleaner. She had keys to the house and was seen to lock all the windows and double bolt both the front and back doors. If no one could get in, no one could have got out easily either. The cleaner then vanished and never reappeared and the house, grand as it was, began to deteriorate gradually over the next few years, with obvious signs of neglect as paint withered from the door.

But was the house empty? Neighbours on either side began to wonder as noises were heard through the walls. Was it significant these were normally heard during the hours of darkness and especially after midnight? And voices too, both men and women’s, could be heard even though people were certain that no one went into Brien’s house, no lights could be seen and, during the day, the whole house seemed quite dead. However, no one bothered to investigate and the house was left in peace.

At some point, however, and after many years, the house was sold, but a lot of time had passed since Brien had died and World War I was underway. The house was done up as a boarding house and rooms were let to unsuspecting visitors. The house soon revealed that whatever had lurked there had not gone away. Had the sale been a ploy to attract innocent victims? Was someone or something hiding in one of the attic rooms? One of the staff reported hearing voices coming from one of these chambers. When she went to look, however, there was no one there. A cleaner had the same experience, but also felt an invisible presence standing next to her, so intense and evil that she believed it was trying to take control of her mind. She felt, she said ‘almost hypnotised.’ Vampires, it should be noted, have the power of invisibility and try to ‘take over’ a person before attacking them. In the light of these events it was decided that it would not be advisable to let the room so it was kept empty.

However, it is sometimes hard for a hotel owner to turn business away and a young couple desperate for accommodation were given the room, as it was the only one unoccupied. When they went up to it they heard voices. They guessed a mistake had been made and called for help. Mary Brewster was the staff member who came in response. Knowing the room must be empty she walked straight in and saw something that utterly shocked her. When the owner rushed up on hearing her shrieks he found her clutching the end of the bed and gazing up at the attic window as if something had just disappeared through it. Mary was in a badly shaken state and refused to discuss what she had seen. She left and never came back.

Then Andrew Muir arrived. He was a student who had an interest in the supernatural and was desperate to see what was causing the incidents in the room. With the owner’s agreement he sat there one night on his own. He had a bell with him which he would ring if he saw the presence of an entity. The owner heard the bell ring and rushed to the room hoping to see the ‘ghost’. Instead he found the body of Andrew Muir slumped in a chair with, according to some reports, blood running from his shoulder and neck. The incident was certainly hushed up. No one, as far as I have been able to discover, was charged with Andrew’s murder. Andrew Muir was a medical student at Edinburgh University. If he had graduated it would be a straightforward matter to confirm his details, but as he died while still a student it’s all a little harder to confirm. It has to be acknowledged that, as often is the case, details may have added over the years, but, nonetheless, it’s hard to deny that the events at Inverleith make up a very strange set of incidents which have ‘vampire’ written all over them.

But a question that seems reasonable to ask is, if there are vampires, where are they all coming from? And where do they all hide? To answer that let us consider another question. Were the notorious killers, Burke and Hare, blamed unfairly? There’s no doubt that the pair were guilty of several murders apparently for the purpose of supplying bodies for medical dissection, and that they also robbed a few graves. But the number of bodies that were going missing from graveyards suggests an event that went beyond the activities of two criminals too inept to escape detection. According to tradition, bodies were disappearing at an extraordinary rate because medical schools were in need of corpses for dissection. But, it should be asked, how much use was a body which had been decaying for several days and been buried in the ground? And can it really be said that all the bodies that vanished were required by medical science? The number of medical students in Edinburgh, during the 1820s, at the time of Burke and Hare, was tiny. As was the number of teaching doctors. The disappearance of the dead from city graveyards far exceeded the needs of the medical fraternity at this time. And the amazing skills alleged to be possessed by grave robbers is an added puzzling aspect. In spite of all the precautions taken, including watch towers and night patrols, bodies kept disappearing, According to reports from the time the grave robbers were so skilled that they could dig up a body several feet under, remove the corpse and fill in the grave so rapidly that the actions passed unnoticed until the plot was examined carefully, maybe days later. The ability of the grave robber to carry out his gruesome task and get clean away undetected was a wonder of the time.

But could there be another explanation? In the 1970s, Tom Alder was passing Gorgie cemetery at the Slateford Road entrance. He glimpsed a movement just at the edge of the area lit by the street lamps, but lying in shadow. He’d passed this way at night many times and had seen people walking around the cemetery before and assumed it was teenagers larking about as a dare. But this was much later than normal and somehow it just seemed different. The person he could make out appeared oddly misshapen and, Tom explained:



Frankly it looked as if the figure was wearing some kind of cloak. A car went by and it seemed to startle ‘him.’ I assumed it was a ‘he’, but he didn’t seem to notice me. It was about 1 a.m. so there wasn’t anyone around and at that point I was more curious than anything. But then something totally weird happened. I know it sounds hard to believe, I can hardly believe it myself, but ‘something’ seemed to rise out of the ground beside the shadowy figure. My body felt like it had turned to ice in an instant. A voice in my head kept saying, ‘It’s just a trick. It’s just a trick,’ but I was petrified. There was just something so weird about it. I must have said something in the middle of all this, or done something, and the shadowy figure turned and looked straight at me stepping forward a bit more into the light. It had a human shape but spindly arms and legs. I was utterly panicking and wanted to get away, but I couldn’t get anything to move. Next, I saw that the figure that had risen from the ground was facing me. It looked like a woman’s shape as it had a kind of flowing garment on. All this probably happened in seconds, but it felt like a lifetime. I might have stood there forever if the woman hadn’t suddenly lifted a couple of feet off the ground and seemed to hover in the air with her arms pointing towards me like a scene from a horror film. I admit I screamed. I’ve never been so terrified in my whole life not even while in the army. But that seemed to break the spell and I turned and ran, not along Slateford Road which was my usual route, but round the church and up Harrison Road. Any second I expected to see those creatures, but nothing else happened. My wife thought I must have drunk too much, and I had had a drink, but only a couple of pints, nothing more than usual. After that I gave Slateford Road a wide birth and it was only after several months that I plucked up courage to walk past the cemetery gates at night. Did I imagine it all? I know it may sound strange but I really hope that I did. Thinking about it sends shivers through me.



Tom’s experience certainly stretches belief. I can add a personal note here. For a few years while in my early twenties, my wife, Evelyn, and I lived in a flat overlooking Gorgie cemetery, so I was particularly intrigued by Tom’s account. I did occasionally see individuals walking through the graveyard at night, but never saw anything remotely strange, and the people I did see I took to be youngsters testing their nerves as many of us have no doubt done. There’s no obvious short cut through the cemetery to Gorgie Road so anyone there would only go in after dark for some other reason which, of course, could be perfectly innocent. While Tom’s experience is the only one of its type I’m aware of from Edinburgh I have heard of similar incidents from across Scotland, though it has to be said they are few and far between. One has, therefore, to look at the possibility that some kind of strange trick was being played out. But why? And how could anyone be sure that someone would pass at the appropriate time? Then there’s the fact Tom saw the woman apparently rise from the ground. A trick of the light? Or had Tom’s imagination simply got the better of him? The truth is that, once a person is dead and buried, it rarely happens that a grave is examined to make sure that the corpse is still lying in its resting place.

I’ve often wondered if there’s any connection with the type of incident experienced by Tom and an event which took place some years later. In October 1992, in a house overlooking Niddry Burn, Moira woke up in the early hours of the morning and caught sight of an intense white light clearly visible through the window. She got out of bed to take a closer look and her attention was drawn to a tree at the foot of the garden. Crouching on a thick branch was a creature which she took at first to be a giant bird, one as big as a man. Moira was frightened and fascinated all at the same time. She wanted to step back from the window, but felt a powerful impulse as if she was unable to look away. But as she took a longer look she became aware that apart from its huge size there were other strange aspects to it. It seemed to have a mixture of human and bird type features; ordinary arms and legs, but attached to its back were two large wings. It was a disturbing experience although the entity did not seem to be aware of her presence and made no attempt to confront her. Oddly, Moira’s husband slept through her sighting and couldn’t be woken up. Moira, too, felt ‘a bit strange’, almost if she had ‘walked into another world’. Admittedly, it’s difficult to be sure exactly what was seen and there are various possibilities, but some traditional descriptions of vampires include beings with wings. And vampires are often portrayed as possessing bat-like characteristics even, on some occasions, turning into these beasts to attack or escape.

As the history of vampires shows, these creatures can manage remarkable transformations. They need not appear as solid flesh and blood creatures. Nor need they necessarily launch a physical attack on a human being. In fact, the psychic vampire, one which sucks the life force from a man or woman, might be a far more common entity. There are many accounts of the incubus and succubus, the strange creatures which appear during the night in the form of a man or beautiful woman, and attempt to have sexual intercourse with the occupant of the bed. But as these entities do not appear to posses real bodies is their intention, in fact, to suck out the spirit force and thereby sustain their own bizarre existence? Some claim that this is, indeed, the case and incidents from more recent times suggest that they may be right. Sandra Donald was in her forties when she experienced a messy divorce. She said:



After we split I bought a small flat in Leith. This was around August 1981. I was pleased to have a place of my own and felt I had a start in rebuilding my life again. I really liked my new home and it was very handy for getting to town where I worked. I was in a bit of turmoil because of everything I’d been through, but there’s no way that explained what happened. One day the atmosphere in the flat just seemed to change. I’d felt fine there, but after I came home from work one evening, I think it was October, the atmosphere seemed all heavy and depressed. I couldn’t put my finger on it and thought it was just my imagination. But that night in bed I had a strange dream that something human-like, but not fully like a man, put his mouth over mine, but wasn’t kissing me, more sucking the air from my mouth. I woke up in fright and thought I saw something, I’m not sure what, disappear out the window. I was terrified and stayed awake for ages. I thought ‘you’ve been working too hard. It’s just a daft dream.’ The following night nothing happened, but the night after I had that horrible dream again. I woke up and I swear I saw what looked like that man thing again disappearing out the window, but I got a better sight of it. It looked like a man’s shape, but I could see through his body. I really felt alone and vulnerable and went into the sitting room where I dozed in the chair till morning. The next night I forced myself to go to bed, left the bedside lamp on and slept right through. And I never had that dream again, though the atmosphere in the flat was still oppressive. Now I realised I was getting listless. I thought at first it was because I’d lost sleep, but I was getting a good sleep and still feeling washed out. People began telling me I looked tired and pale. And it was true. My energy seemed to be going down to nothing. I became convinced that it must be the flat. I hated to admit it because I’d been so proud of it and loved the place. I moved in with my mum though I didn’t tell her why, just saying I needed some company. Two weeks later I went back to the flat and the whole feeling of the place was miles better. It made me feel better too. I was a bit nervous when I started sleeping there again, but nothing happened. The place seemed like it was back to normal. I have no idea what happened to me, but it was a horrible experience. I felt that I’d been used by something. God knows what and I’d rather not find out, to be honest.



Sandra may not have suffered long-term physical harm. She was not subjected to an assault by a blood-sucking beast, but her experience suggests that the vampire, which sets out to live on the life force of men and women, may be the one we truly have to fear. It can catch us unawares while we sleep and quietly eat away at our energy levels, and do it so gently that we remain blissfully unaware of its presence.





5


Contacting ‘Other Worlds’


In the Royal Mile there once stood a statue to one of the city’s weirdest exports. Daniel Home may no longer be a household name, but in the nineteenth century he was internationally famous. A friend to royalty and the rich in Britain, the United States, and Russia, he was born in Currie in March 1833, and raised in Portobello by his aunt. His family had emigrated to the USA while he was still a baby leaving Daniel behind. Daniel’s mother was herself a psychic and he believed that it was through her — she came from Highland stock — that he inherited his amazing psychic powers. From his father he claimed a different and exalted pedigree. Daniel was told by his parents that he was descended from the Home family of the Borders, the ancestors of Sir Alec Douglas-Home who became the British Prime Minister in 1963. The account he was told was that his father was the illegitimate son of a member of the Home family and a servant, following an illicit affair. The Home family, naturally, never admitted to it and it may be untrue, but there’s no doubt that Daniel Home believed it and boasted openly of his distinguished ancestry.

Home’s first psychic experience occurred in Portobello when he was no more than four years old. A cousin who lived several miles away appeared to him in a vision. The phantom spoke to Daniel and told him that he had passed into another place, but when Daniel told of what he had seen no one believed him. It turned out though that the spectre had told the truth when he reported his own death, and young Daniel was looked at in a different light thereafter. There were other strange incidents. His aunt claimed that when he was a baby voices could be heard in his room when there was no one there, and invisible hands would gently rock his cradle.

After a period in the United States, Home returned to Britain in 1855. His reputation as a psychic medium went before him and he was soon holding seances, which were attended by well-known figures of the day, including Sir David Brewster, Scotland’s foremost scientist and a graduate of Edinburgh University. Brewster was amazed by Home’s psychic ability and encouraged others to investigate Daniel and see for themselves. Home soon found himself in even more exalted company, contacting the spirits of the dead for the Emperor Napoleon III of France, Queen Sophia of Holland and the Tsar of Russia, among other aristocrats of Europe. The man of humble origins from Edinburgh had most certainly arrived.

So what was it about Daniel Home that marked him out from other psychics? Or were these rarified circles the dupes of a cunning individual who pretended to paranormal powers he did not really possess? The controversy, which began in Home’s lifetime, has rumbled on to the present. Hundreds of witnesses attended Home’s seances and claimed to have seen events which defied reality. In broad daylight people said they saw Home float from the ground and drift up to the ceiling. He did this many times, but sceptics still refused to believe it. Home claimed that the spirits of the dead were present at his seances and it was these beings that, taking hold of his arms, raised him many feet off the floor.

In 1869, he carried out the most bizarre feat of his whole career. In the presence of several distinguished witnesses, including members of the House of Lords, Home floated off the ground and then drifted horizontally through a gap between the window and the sill, hovering thirty feet above the pavement outside. The space his body squeezed through was no more than eighteen inches wide and some even suggested that he had gone straight through the glass window. Home, however, had previously demonstrated the ability to lengthen his body and become much thinner in the process, a feat which on its own defies common sense, but was witnessed by dozens of individuals. Lord Adare who was present and published an account of the event, could offer no explanation of how Home had managed it, but noted that, after drifting in mid-air outside the building for a few minutes, Home simply floated back in through another window.

Was it some kind of mass hallucination? It might seem to be the answer except that scientists who tested Home came to believe in his extraordinary powers. Sir William Crookes, the discoverer of the element thallium, conducted what he believed to be tamper-proof experiments with Home in his laboratory. Afterwards, he had no doubt that he had demonstrated that Home possessed unexplained abilities including that of making musical instruments play without touching them and changing the weight of objects simply by looking at them. He also wrote of how Home materialised a glowing hand which put a piece of shining crystal into Crooke’s palm, and confirmed that he had watched Home float from the ground at will. When Crookes published his findings several prominent scientists ridiculed him and he was forced to end his experiments. He never doubted what he had seen, however, and would quietly confirm it in private conversation.

Meanwhile, Home’s life moved on. He abandoned his work with scientists convinced that no matter what mystical incidents they witnessed they would always doubt, or even deny, what they had seen. But in less demanding circles people could not get enough of him. He was invited to the greatest houses in the land because of his ability to relay messages from the spirit world and materialise phantoms, that would be instantly recognised by those present as their departed relatives. Either people were easily fooled, or deluding themselves, or something truly strange was going on. Many people, including MPs, writers and businessmen, came to his seances again and again. Whatever he was doing to produce such bizarre phenomena it must have been convincing to attract such an important clientele.

When Home died in 1886 his wife, knowing of his attachment to Edinburgh, gave the City Council the then vast sum of £4,000 to set up a memorial to her husband. The statue was erected outside Canongate Parish Church where it stood till the early 1950s, by which time it had fallen into disrepair. It then disappeared till some years later it was tracked down by an Evening News reporter who found it lying in a builder’s scrap yard. It was never re-erected, though part of it found a home at the Edinburgh College of Parapsychology. Maybe the time has arrived to honour afresh the memory of Daniel Home, one of the city’s most famous sons, and to put up a new monument in his name.

Psychics tell us that interacting with the spirit world can be a dangerous business for the uninitiated. You need to make sure that you are protected from the physical and mental effect of crossing the paths of entities from other dimensions. Was this a warning Hugh Miller chose to ignore? Miller was a self-taught genius of the nineteenth century, who contributed to many fields including science, religion and the paranormal. He was admired by many and in contact with leading people of the time, including Andrew Carnegie and the founder of environmentalism, John Muir, among others. The Encyclopaedia of Scotland describes him as no less than ‘an icon in many disciplines’.





The grave of Hugh Miller scientist and writer with a world-wide reputation. So why did he feel so terrorised by demons from other worlds that he committed suicide?

Hugh Miller was not born in Edinburgh, originating further north on the edge of the Cromarty Firth. But he eventually settled in the capital where he edited a newspaper The Witness. By this time he had earned a reputation as a scientific writer and as a man who was attempting to reconcile the theory of evolution with events in the Bible. Miller was, by all accounts, happily married to his wife Lydia, who had borne him four children. The family lived in a house in Portobello known as ‘Shrub Mount’, which he had purchased in April 1854. It stood on the shore side of the High Street and was described at the time as ‘an eighteenth-century cottage with its own grounds.’ With an established reputation, Miller seemed to have everything to live for and was in demand as a speaker and writer.

So why did events take such a bizarre turn? On 23 December 1856, Miler, as he often did, helped his daughter Harriet with her school homework. He then read aloud to the children, poems by William Cowper, one of the best loved poets of the time. After going upstairs to his study where he sat for a while he then went into his bedroom, located next door, to rest. It was all a part of his normal everyday routine. At some time during the night, however, Hugh Miller went back to his study, pulled up the fisherman’s jersey he was wearing, placed a gun to his chest and blasted a bullet through his body.

Why he did this aroused a controversy which inflames passions to this day. Although it might have been thought that the sound of gunfire would have immediately alerted the household, Miller’s corpse was not discovered until the following morning. Foul play was at no point suspected. His wife Lydia claimed that, on discovering the body, her first thought was that a tragic accident had taken place. Hugh, she guessed, had been playing with the gun and it had gone off by accident. Incredibly she missed the note Hugh had left for her, which was lying on his desk; a note which told a different tale. It was the Reverend Thomas Guthrie, a family friend who, having gone to the house on hearing the news, drew Lydia’s attention to the message, which certainly suggested that something had tipped Miller over the edge. The note read:



Dearest Lydia,

My brain burns. I must have walked; and a fearful dream rises upon me. I cannot bear the horrible thought. God and father of the Lord Jesus Christ have mercy on me. Dearest Lydia, dear children farewell. My brain burns as the recollection grows. My dear, dear wife, farewell.

Hugh Miller.



An observer might well wonder just exactly what Hugh Miller was talking about. It certainly wasn’t obvious to his wife and friends. A post-mortem was carried out which added little to what is known of the event. It stated that Miller’s brain had a diseased appearance and that he had killed himself while temporarily insane. The disease referred to was not specified so whether it had any relevance to the events is unclear.

So was Miller suffering from temporary insanity? Certainly the scientific world where his name is still revered would like to think so. They would hate to admit that their hero succumbed to a far more weird death, that he was a man taunted and frightened by the spirits and entities of those other worlds which he had, throughout his life, believed in. And it seems, communicated with. There’s no doubt that in the last few months of his life, Miller was convinced that the demons of the spirit domains were closing in on him. He seemed unable to escape them.

One of Miller’s most widely read books then and now was his Scenes and Legends of Northern Scotland, published in 1835. Miller had gathered together a large collection of ‘folk tales’, many of which had a supernatural basis. It was an odd thing for a scientist to do. But, of course, at the time Miller had not earned a reputation for his work in geology, for which he was so later admired by the scientific community. One result of this has been the refusal of scientists to accept that Miller really believed that the incidents he recounted had actually happened, in much the same way that the genius Isaac Newton’s fascination with astrology and alchemy is played down, as it is seen as demeaning to anyone who claims to possess a scientific outlook, and certainly not something to be linked to a world-famous scientist.

The problem is that Miller seemed to really believe in the paranormal incidents he wrote of. He even described a strange event that he had been personally involved in. It happened when his father, a fisherman, was out at sea. He recalled:



There were no forebodings in our house as a [letter from my father] had just been received. My mother was sitting on the evening after, beside the household fire, plying the cheerful needle, when the house door, which had been left unfastened, fell open, and I was despatched from her side to shut it. What followed must be regarded as simply the recollection, though a vivid one, of a boy who had completed his fifth year only a month before. Day had not wholly disappeared, but it was fast posting on to night when I saw at the open door less a yard off my breast, as plainly as ever I saw anything, a dissevered hand and arm stretched towards me. Hand and arm were those of a female. They bore a livid and sodden appearance and directly fronting me where the body ought to have been there was only blank, transparent space, through which I could see the dim forms of objects beyond.



Hugh screamed in fright and ran to his mother. It was an incident which affected him in later years, as the event coincided with the death of his father, lost at sea. It was as if a phantom from the world beyond was letting him know of his parent’s passing from this life to the next.

It’s unclear exactly what, if any, visions Miller experienced in later life, but it seems irrefutable that he did so. He talked of ‘fairies’ visiting his garden and he did not mean the later, winged Victorian invention, but the more human-like entities famously described by the Reverend Robert Kirk in his epic work, The Secret Commonwealth of Elves, Fauns and Fairies published in 1691; beings who though they appear almost identical to humans, inhabit a parallel universe, but can enter ours at will. Hugh’s wife, Lydia, who it seems reasonable to assume knew him as well as anyone, wrote in her biography of her husband that his mother had filled his mind with tales of demons and other beings, which had the effect of depressing his mind. There seems no doubt then that Hugh Miller took such tales seriously as, during 1856, this ‘other world’ was impinging more and more on his daily life. He did, according to friends, get increasingly nervous about what they assumed were people invading his garden, and he seemed overly fearful that they would get into his house. They guessed he was worried about losing his extensive fossil collection, but would he have been so concerned about this that he bought himself a gun and ammunition? Was the weapon really intended to ward off the denizens of other worlds? Or had he come to the conclusion that only through his own death could he end the visions of those strange, disturbing entities that seemed determined to impose themselves on his thoughts?

The fate of Hugh Miller and the fame of Daniel Home show that belief in the supernatural was widespread in nineteenth-century Edinburgh. Individuals, who could not in any way be described as ‘fanciful’, expressed their belief that mankind was not the sole inhabitant of the planet. A leading figure in the revival of ‘magic’ as a dynamic force was Lewis Spence. A graduate of Edinburgh University and an editor on the Scotsman newspaper he set out —using his home at 66, Arden Street as a base — to argue for the importance of magic ritual in human history. As a member of the ‘Golden Dawn’ (a society which put magic ritual into practice) and a supporter of the monthly journal the Occult Review, Spence was in a key position, through his journalistic contacts, to encourage a wider interest in the whole area of the paranormal. His best known publication The Encyclopedia of Occultism, published in 1929 and still in print, draws out the part played by ‘magic’ in every aspect of daily life and in societies across the world. An active Druid, Spence was responsible for the introduction of magic rites into Druidic ritual and was Chief of the Druid Order of Britain. He was a firm believer in the lost continent of Atlantis and wrote a book arguing for its existence. He influenced the views of mystics across the world. It was a sign of the times that Spence, although he held outlandish views, was still able to mix in academic circles and be accepted by academic institutions as an expert; a situation unlikely to re-occur in the twenty-first century where the battle lines between science and magic are more tightly drawn.

Spence seemed reluctant to admit to any encounters with entities from other worlds, unlike the well-known Edinburgh artist John Duncan, whose life spans the period from the last quarter of the nineteenth century to the middle of the twentieth. His writings reveal a man obsessed with the interaction between this world and the spirit domains. His mission, as he saw it, was to produce works of art that would demonstrate this contact with the mystical realms. He wished passionately to paint the figure of Columba, the early Christian missionary, standing on the mound on the island of Iona which the Saint, as he was to become, visited regularly, and where he would be approached by, and communicate with, angels and other entities from the beyond. Duncan had experienced similar encounters himself on the island and longed to present these images to the public.

Although fairies are seen regularly even today few are willing to admit to seeing such unlikely beings. Duncan, however, revelled in his sightings of the nature spirits. He was a key figure in the magazine the Evergreen, which set out to revive interest in the ancient Celts and their traditions. His compatriot Lewis Spence drew out the significance of the title Evergreen, explaining that, ‘in Druidic times people decorated their houses with evergreen plants so that the nature spirits could retire there during the winter.’ To Duncan the fairies were no myth, but real beings. He had seen them and set out to show he had done so by including them in his paintings, examples of which can be seen in the National Gallery of Scotland. Duncan’s fascination with the ‘other world’ of fauns and fairies was not shared by the public, although his pictures were widely admired, but he influenced a generation of mystics, including Robert Crombie, whose encounters with a legion of nature spirits are covered elsewhere in this book.

John Duncan did not claim to have conversed with the phantoms he saw. Helen Duncan, on the other hand, — no relation of John — was most definitely out to contact entities from ‘other worlds’. Scotland’s most famous female mystic, Helen Duncan was not a native of the city, but a notorious episode of her career as a spiritualist medium did take place in the capital. And at the time it caused a worldwide sensation.

Duncan is best known for being, in 1944, charged under the witchcraft act of 1736; the last person to be dealt with in this way. But although the use of this ancient law against an individual and the guilty verdict were both harsh and unfair, they were in their way a backhanded compliment to Duncan’s psychic ability. Helen had revealed at a seance in Portsmouth, through the spirit of a deceased sailor, that a ship of the Royal Navy, HMS Barham, had been sunk by enemy action. The news that Helen had somehow found this out caused consternation in official circles as it was supposed to be a state secret. If she had learnt about this disaster what else might she discover? During the Cold War the CIA in the United States took part in a secret project to use the paranormal powers of psychics to spy on Soviet Russia. But in the 1940s, the secret services in World War II Britain simply saw Helen Duncan as a potential threat to national security. As a result she was arrested and put on trial. It was no doubt a shattering moment for Helen emotionally, but it raised her profile to star levels. Overnight, she became the most famous medium in Britain.

But that would never have been predicted back in the 1930s, when Helen’s reputation as a medium was under threat. Up till then she had been building up a profile as a psychic of real ability. At her seances she exuded the substance known as ‘ectoplasm’, which would form slowly into spirit beings. During these events Helen Duncan would be tied to a chair and wear only a loose-fitting dress with no undergarments. She would be examined by female spiritualists to ensure that there was no cheating. It all seemed foolproof. However, on 3 May 1933, her world fell apart when Helen found herself on trial at Edinburgh Sheriff Court on charges of receiving money under false pretences by, ‘pretending that she was a medium through whom spirits of deceased persons were openly materialised to become visible to and converse with those present in the room with her.’ In other words, she was being accused of being nothing more than a fake. The trial, which attracted journalists from around the globe, and for which individuals from across the UK were called as witnesses, gives a fascinating glimpse into the world of Edinburgh mystics of that era.

Helen Duncan was living at 1, Wauchope Place, Niddrie Mains, at the time, but the seance, for which Helen had been booked as the medium, and which subsequently led to her trial, had been held at 24, Stafford Street on the evening of 5 January 1933. The seance took place in a room on the top floor of the house, a corner having been partitioned off by curtains as a cabinet for the medium. Inside the cabinet a chair was placed for Helen to sit on. Before the seance began the main lights were switched off so that the room was illuminated solely by a dim, red, 40-watt electric light. A candle flickered in the background. In the room there was also a 120-watt, unlit electric hand lamp, which was to play a key part in the events that followed. Helen entered the cabinet and curtains were then drawn around her so that she could not be seen. Meanwhile, the sitters arranged themselves in a semicircle in front of the cabinet to await the spirit presence. The candle was put out so that only the red light shone and the audience started to sing as this was believed to encourage the spirits to ‘come through’.





Spiritualists attending a séance at which psychic mediums contact phantoms of the dead.

After a little more than two minutes the voice of ‘Albert’ was heard. He was Helen’s ‘spirit guide’ and well known for cracking jokes and making risqué (at the time) comments. To the sitters he joked, ‘That is an awful voice you have for singing, Miss Maule. If you heard what it sounds like you would not sing again.’ The room erupted in laughter. Other voices were now heard, including that of ‘Little Peggy’, a child spirit who was frequently ‘brought over’ by Helen. Several apparitions then materialised glowing white in the darkened room.

It’s not clear whether the seance was set up deliberately to discredit Helen or if members of the audience became suspicious. However, Miss Maule who owned the house suddenly grabbed the figure of ‘Little Peggy’, who had by now appeared outside the seance cabinet as a white phantom. She told the trial that as she took hold of the ‘spirit’ she realised that ‘it was no more than an object made of soft material’ which tore as ‘Little Peggy’ struggled to break free. Miss Maule then pushed the curtains apart while another sitter Miss Mackay switched on the powerful hand lamp. They claimed that they discovered Helen bending forward, clearly not in a trance, stuffing a white object inside her top. Helen refused a request to show what it was she was trying to hide, but eventually agreed to strip if all the men were asked to leave, which they did. She then removed her clothes and a white stockinette vest with a hole in it fell to the floor. To the charge that this was the object she had been waving about, pretending that it was the spirit of ‘Little Peggy’, Helen replied evasively, ‘It might have been. I’ll no’ say no.’ On the surface her response appeared incriminating and led to criminal charges being brought against her.

During the trial, although there was a feeling that Helen had ‘let the side down’, many spiritualists stepped forward to support her. A doctor, Mary Hutchinson of King’s Park, Glasgow, told of a test that she had put Helen through. She had been stripped naked to ensure that she was not concealing anything on her person then given only a black shift to wear which had been inspected thoroughly. However, even under these strict controls Helen still managed to produce, from her mouth and other orifices, a vast quantity of the mysterious substance called ectoplasm; a thick white material which, while it is floating through the air, is used by spirits to form a ‘body’ so that they can appear in human form in our world. The volume of ectoplasm Helen produced covered an area of twelve square feet. As Dr Hutchinson told the court:



Nobody who had undergone the examination Mrs Duncan underwent could have concealed such a quantity about her person. Mrs Duncan had the assistance of some power which I cannot explain and could produce phenomena which it was impossible to produce by sleight of hand.



Evidence was given by sitters at Helen’s seances of the wonderful sights they had witnessed; communication with long-dead loved ones and even the sight of them ‘in the flesh’ as they materialised in seance rooms. Even so the case went against her and Helen was fined £10.

So was Helen Duncan a fraud? There is no doubt that psychics, like anyone else, may feel pressurised to produce results when, on occasion, they may be unable to. People who visited her desperately wanted some contact with their relatives on the ‘other side’. Helen may have, on occasion, tried too hard to please. But if she was nothing more than a cheat how did she manage to relate the sinking of HMS Barham, a wartime state secret? And why did a government, in the middle of a World War, set out to gaol her if they did not take her psychic abilities seriously? There is evidence that, even after the war was won, police and the security services kept tabs on Helen. Surely there is no stronger accolade to her psychic abilities than that.

Though Helen was a medium of ability, arguably she did not match up to the weird powers of Daniel Home. However, the city seems to be linked inextricably to those of a mystical bent, producing many psychics of repute. So did Edinburgh also produce the greatest physical medium of the twentieth and twenty-first centuries? Normally, when we think of a psychic, we assume that they are making contact with the spirits of those who have passed into another world. But could these ‘other worlds’ include those populated by beings we would not consider human? And how does this link in with the life of a famous film star? In fact, does contact with the spirit world provide the best proof that alien entities really do exist?

In February 1995, I received a strange phone call. I had been involved in investigating a number of UFO sightings, which had been covered in the local papers. As a result I had been contacted by many people all of whom had some strange incident they wanted to tell me about. But this call was very different. The voice at the end of the line asked me an astounding question: ‘Do you want to see an alien?’ At this point I might have put the phone down. I was used to people phoning me with extravagant claims, but this topped them all. So why didn’t I simply say ‘no thanks,’ put it down to a hoax call and forget it? I didn’t believe for one moment that I would really see an alien, but I did wonder what had motivated the man to make him sound so unusually convincing. And that was how I first came to meet Ray Tod.

Tod, as it turned out, though almost unknown to the general public, certainly ranks as one of Scotland’s leading mystics and most powerful mediums. I and others did ‘see’ an alien, but that was only a fraction of strange events that unravelled in the unlikely setting of Ray’s sparely furnished living room. And the man, small, overweight, balding and existing on a limited income was an unlikely figure as a medium. However, he never once asked for money and though he could have earned a living from his amazing abilities he was anxious to stay out of the limelight, inviting only a select group of individuals to witness the bizarre events that he was capable of producing. For over two years, I and others visited Ray Tod and participated in dozens of seances where he acted as the medium. The results were astonishing and experienced by so many people that it is hard to conclude that each one of us was either being deluded or the victim of an over-active imagination. Tod’s dearest wish was that he could be tested by an organisation like Edinburgh University’s ‘Koestler Parapsychology Unit’, but unfortunately he died before that came to pass.

Ray Tod lived in a second-floor, rented flat in West Montgomery Street, a few minutes from Leith Walk. The living room in which the seances took place was rather shabbily furnished, but stood out from the ordinary because of a range of stuffed animals and other objects linked to Africa, with which Ray felt a strong affinity. It lent the room an exotic air. Tod was a good talker and it was often difficult to get a word in, but he would listen and explain and certainly knew a vast amount about spiritualism and spirit contact. He was very matter-of-fact about the bizarre events that took place, especially considering that he was the channel of it all. He often passed on comments that he said the spirits had made to him. One, which he repeated frequently, ran, ‘You think you’re investigating us, but who do you think you’re kidding? We’re investigating you.’ Ray found this amusing, but there was a disturbing aspect to such comments. I often wondered just who, or what, were these entities Ray appeared to be in touch with?

Anyone whose experience of a seance has come from books, films or television would be surprised at those held at Ray Tod’s flat. In the first place, the spirits appeared through Ray in conditions of full light. It’s true that these took place in the evening and, on occasions, on darker nights when the sun set early, but all the lights in Tod’s living room were switched on at all times. Not I, nor anyone else who had a sitting with Ray, ever had a ‘dark room’ seance. There was no area of Ray’s person which was not fully illuminated by light.

So what did the sitters glimpse at a seance with Ray? An incredible number of spirit faces, as clear as day. Phantoms of those who had lived at one time, but were now, Ray told us, resident in another world. The faces that appeared could be seen in full detail including beards, hair styles and glasses. I can only describe it by comparing it to watching a series of film clips running before your eyes, except that they were not images from fiction, if one could believe one’s own senses but the actual spectres of those who had passed over and were now visiting from the spirit world. They would appear in rapid succession, one after the other, as if in a rush to reveal themselves.

In terms of ‘seeing an alien’ Ray did not disappoint me. The seance I attended on 24 May 1995 was certainly a memorable one as on this occasion I did see the face of an ‘alien’. I described it shortly after as:



a puffy-faced alien. The face was light grey, round shaped with what seemed like tubes running from the back of the head in a circular shape to the nape of the neck. The most prominent aspect, however, was the eyes [which had] no proper eyeball in the sense that we would recognise. I did get the feeling, however, that he (or she?) was staring at me. The head was completely bald, or, at least, looked extremely smooth. The face was very lined.



I admit that I found this experience disturbing. If the spirits of ‘aliens’ were ‘coming through’ what did this say about the spirit world or mankind’s place in the universe? However, the ‘aliens’ were a minor aspect of the many sights I witnessed. These were, to borrow a phrase, definitely ‘seances in the raw’; seances at which physical changes appeared to take place in the physical body of the medium and in the surroundings in which we were sitting.

At this seance, however, an event occurred which threw me and I have puzzled over ever since as it did throw into question the nature of what Ray Tod was doing and what I was seeing. A succession of faces followed that of the alien and then, completely unexpectedly, the face of Richard Todd appeared. Faces could appear incredibly clearly and there was no doubt that this was the same actor who appeared in the memorable 1950s’ film The Dam Busters among others. But in 1995 Todd was very much alive and did not die till December 2009, at the age of 90. I have never managed to solve this enigma and the fact that a living person’s face should appear among so many deceased ones has raised concerns in my mind over what was happening. However, against that is the fact that many people who attended Ray’s seances saw these spirit faces as clearly as if they had been sitting next to someone on a bus and, in many cases, on comparing notes, the same phantoms had appeared to each one of us on separate occasions. Could all of us over several years and on many visits have been imagining these incidents? I have no doubt that ‘something’ was going on though people may, understandably, come to differing conclusions.

A seance would start with Ray chatting. After a while — and the length of time varied — sitters would notice a change come over Ray’s face. It seemed as if it was dissolving and some kind of thicker material was forming over it. Then, incredibly, other people’s faces would start to appear very clearly and distinctly. Normally, these were not, I should explain, faces of people that I recognised or knew. Nor were they faces of famous people from the past, with the odd exception.

Although the format of the seances did not change in any way, each one produced varied results. The same spirit faces appeared from time to time, but many appeared only once. A fellow investigator, Bill Adam, acted as a compiler of notes at the seances. The description of what took place is taken directly from the details he typed up, from notes supplied by the participants.

Andy Smith described a seance he attended on 21 March 1995.



We started the evening by chatting for a while. During this time I had the distinct impression that faces were forming. Eventually Ray went into a ‘trance’.The first face that appeared was a surly looking person I had seen before. Faces then emerged quick and fast. The bald-headed gentleman, quite severe and haughty looking. I’m sure I caught sight of my grandfather. There was a man with fair, short-cut, frizzy hair. These figures all looked normal. Then came the monocled person, who Ray later explained was the doorkeeper. He was the ‘spirit’ who protected Ray during a seance and decided who to ‘let through’. According to Ray he was his most important contact. All psychics require some form of protection from the ‘other world’. In Ray’s case this was doubly so as he, as a physical medium, was allowing spirit entities to use his body to ‘come over’ from the spirit world. That this had an impact on Ray, both physically and mentally, I have absolutely no doubt.



Jim Edgar attended a seance with Ray Tod on 10 March 1996. You can sense the amazement as he wrote down what he had observed.



At one point an Egyptian face appeared. It was broad and round, but the most striking point was the straight black hair. I immediately identified it with the pictures of ancient Egyptians seen constructing the pyramids. Ray’s right hand was glowing as if there was a pink force field or aura forming a duplicate hand beside his own. The living room kept moving around until I felt quite dizzy. I had noticed this effect on previous occasions, but this time it seemed especially noticeable. The whole shape of the room appeared to change. The door seemed to come in at right angles to where we were sitting so that it was parallel to our chairs. From beneath the door at floor level an intense streak of light could be seen. I have not witnessed this before. Overall, the whole room looked to have shrunk to about a third of its size and it felt claustrophobic.



After the seance was over Tod would ask the sitters to describe who or ‘what’ had ‘come through’. The paradox was that these phantoms were appearing in his sitting room, but as they were using his body to materialise, he could not see them himself. I found this aspect unsettling as not all the spirits who appeared seemed by any means friendly and some looked, I have to admit, downright hostile. I mentioned this to Ray who, however, took it all in his stride convinced that his spirit friends would look after him. Tod refused to make money from his amazing ability. ‘I don’t want to be turned into a freak show’, he explained to me.

Edinburgh has produced many individuals who though interested in the realms of the supernatural don’t set out to contact entities from other worlds. From the 1960s to his death, Charles Cameron was a well-known Edinburgh psychic investigator who built up a large library of artefacts and books on the occult. He was also a curator of the capital’s ‘Wax Museum’. He did an enormous amount to bring to public attention the variety of paranormal phenomenon that was taking place in and around the city, and was the first to name Edinburgh as the country’s supernatural ‘hot spot’. It’s not clear to what extent Charles Cameron claimed psychic ability, but he certainly did have a number of experiences. He told of the night when alone in the ‘Wax Museum’, formerly a children’s shelter, he was walking on the top floor when his torch suddenly failed. He found himself stranded in the pitch black with no one else in the building. It was an unnerving experience which, as he fumbled for the exit, became frightening when all around him he sensed the presence of children standing and whispering to each other. It concentrated his mind wonderfully and he managed to make a quick get-away. Having found myself in similar circumstances in a haunted building I, for one, certainly know how he must have felt!

Cameron did not see the paranormal as ‘supernatural’. According to his view, ‘Everything, whether it be ghosts, death by sorcery or even fortune-telling by tarot cards all occur strictly according to natural laws.’ What Charles Cameron was suggesting was that as the ‘paranormal’ was subject to laws then it must be possible not only to access these events readily, but also, in effect, to control them. He believed in the power of ‘magically charged talisman and medieval curses and witchcraft.’ He had no doubt that an individual may, on occasion, be able to affect matter through the power of the mind, as modern physics indeed suggest. Cameron was ahead of his time in the way that he realised psychic powers could be abused. In the early 1980s, when the public was less aware of the British and US Governments’ experiments with psychics and their potential for use against an enemy, Cameron argued that a ‘psychic war’ was possible. He went a step further suggesting that gifts to a foreign leader could be charged magically with a ritual incantation which would affect the mind of the person receiving the present. Is there any evidence that this has been done? Not that I’m aware of, but given the secretive nature of governments, and what we have learned of the many bizarre attempts by the CIA to assassinate the Cuban leader Fidel Castro during the 1960s, one could hardly doubt that such a scenario might well have occurred or might even be planned at this moment.

It would certainly seem that an area such as Edinburgh possessing an ‘other wordly’ aura might encourage the development of the mystical side of even the most hard-headed type. It was after taking up the post of Astronomer Royal of Scotland in Edinburgh that the English-born Charles Piazzi Smyth started to ‘go off the rails’ as his colleagues saw it. Smyth, who lived between 1818 and 1900, is the founding father of Pyramidology; the belief that the measurements incorporated within the Great Pyramid at Giza posses both a mystical significance and a hidden message. He wrote several lengthy books detailing his research on the matter in which he argued, among many other ‘facts’, that the whole of human history had been documented in the angles and lengths the builders had used to erect the pyramid. By working out the numbers involved and their relationship to each other all significant dates in Man’s past could be known and his future forseen. When his scientific colleagues scoffed at his discoveries Smyth abandoned astronomy. But his ideas spawned a long line of successors and his belief, that the Great Pyramid hides a myriad of secrets just waiting to be revealed, is more popular today than ever.

Even those with a natural talent find that a visit to the capital encourages psychic visions. In the 1980s, Highland Seer Swein Macdonald, who was often referred to as the contemporary Brahan Seer, was visiting the city. I met Swein in the 1990s at his Highland home. He was a big bear of a man with flowing hair and huge hands. He insisted on hugging all and sundry and you feared that a bone or two might be crushed in the process! But for all that he was an amazing psychic. I learned of a visit he had made to Edinburgh where he experienced an astonishing revelation. As he was sitting with friends in a restaurant the conversation turned to the disappearance of five-year-old Caroline Hogg who had last been seen in the garden of her Portobello home. Suddenly it was as if Swein had been taken to another place. He sat upright and banged his fist hard against the tabletop three times in rapid succession. He then told his startled friends that he had seen Caroline lying dead in long grass in a lay-by. This turned out to be accurate. It was eventually discovered that Caroline was a victim of the child killer Robert Black. However, Swein, who had a voice to match his presence, had been overheard by several people and his prediction was reported to the police. Such are the dangers of possessing the ability to see events others can’t. At one time, no doubt, Swein would have found himself destined for the bonfire reserved for witches and those of similar bent.

The dividing line between the mystic who becomes a saint and the one who finds himself condemned is a fine one. In another age, Edinburgh’s Margaret Sinclair might have faced an uncertain fate. Instead she is one of the very few Scots who may be raised to the sainthood. Margaret died as far back as 1925 when only in her mid-twenties, but many miraculous cures have been reported by people who have prayed to her for help when suffering from a life-threatening condition. It is even said that she made a blind person see again. Celebrity Jimmy Saville has claimed that it was through Margaret’s help that his life was saved when, as a two year old, he suffered a bad fall and was seriously ill. His mother, apparently, found a prayer card about Margaret in Leeds Cathedral and asked her to intervene. Shortly thereafter, the toddler’s health improved rapidly. Margaret Sinclair’s body now lies in Mount Vernon cemetery. It would be remarkable if this daughter of the city, a former factory worker at McVitie’s who died at such a young age, were to become Scotland’s first female saint for several centuries.

Margaret, though she may reach a pinnacle denied to others, must be seen as part of a wider phenomenon that often lies hidden. Edinburgh abounds with psychics, many of whom are regularly found in spiritualist churches and other venues across the city. Several have worldwide reputations. In the 1990s, I interviewed spiritual healer Bob Cook. He assured me that ‘everyone can heal. We’ve lost the ability over the years. We’ve become too civilised’. Maybe Bob was right, but perhaps the aura that surrounds the city, that unknown quantity which seems to attract the paranormal, has also led Edinburgh to breed more than its fair share of those who posses that mystic power which, for want of a better word, we label ‘psychic’.





6


Ghost Capital


If there is one aspect of the paranormal that is most closely linked to the streets and wynds of Edinburgh then it must be that of the ghost or phantom. Certainly, the capital is an ancient site and castles and crumbling ruins, not to mention age-old graveyards, appear as natural spots for encountering spirits of the dead. But why should hauntings occur in more modern locations? In pubs, cinemas or clubs? Even in such a recent building as the new Scottish parliament? In 2009, hearing reports of strange incidents taking place there, I offered to investigate the alleged haunting. I was not surprised at this news having forecast before the building was put up that the site would be subject to powerful energy forces, which would produce weird effects.

I had dowsed the site during the building’s construction and had discovered that streams of energy were flowing across the area. At the time I was looking at this in the context of the potential effect on MSPs and their decision-making. It hadn’t occurred to me that this might allow spirits of the past to invade the building. In fact this is just what appears to have happened. As far back as 1707, the year the old Scottish parliament was dissolved and united with England’s, a gruesome murder took place in the kitchens of the mansion house owned by the Duke of Queensberry in the Canongate. The area where this killing took place now forms part of the Scottish Parliament complex and is occupied by the office dealing with MSPs’ allowances and expenses. What makes the story even more horrific is the claim that a young lad was put to death there in a gruesome manner, being roasted alive on a spit. That may be a detail too far, but there’s no doubt that a murder has been linked to this site and that may explain the recent incidents that have disturbed staff who work there. These have included unexplained noises and the aroma of roasting meat. I have also been told of sightings of a young boy, late at night, who gradually fades away as he walks along the corridor, but I have been unable to verify these incidents.

Without more research into events it is difficult to establish exact details. I offered to investigate the area in a non-obtrusive manner, including a questionnaire to relevant staff, a procedure I had used successfully elsewhere, but unfortunately my attempts to look into the matter met with resistance and I was denied access. However, the incidents do show that a ghost may linger for a long time and that the re-building of a site can somehow cause a disturbance which may reactivate the phantom of the long dead.

However, ghosts should not simply be seen as things of the past. These phantoms appear among us today, so we can say with certainty that they are all around us and with us as we go about our daily business. And though some appear as spirits of the deceased from past eras others may have a far more recent pedigree.

In 1996, the ‘PJ Lyles’ pub in Leith Walk was the site of a series of strange occurrences. Staff were disturbed by a range of weird noises heard when no one else was present in the building. There were various odd incidents. Glasses and other objects were moved around after they had been left overnight. The landlady, Elaine, suspected that the spirit of a dead ‘regular’ had been upset by changes that had been made to the pub. Events came to a head one weekend, as Elaine explained: ‘On Friday a few of us were clearing up and we heard footsteps running across the ceiling above us.’ This on its own was peculiar, but what was truly disturbing was that the footsteps did not come to a halt and carried on as if whatever was making them had run right through the wall. Incident piled on incident. One Sunday the police called the assistant manager to the pub as the burglar alarm was ringing. On its own this was not an unusual event, but when he got there curtains over the windows upstairs had been pulled down and pot plants and other items had been thrown on to the floor. It was as if someone had stormed through the building in a mad frenzy. However, following an examination of the premises it was clear that no one had, in fact, broken into the pub and it was as securely locked as it had been the night before. It was a mystery and one which unnerved staff to such an extent that several said that they wouldn’t work there again, till whatever was behind the strange incidents was gone.

Pubs do seem to attract ghosts, although given the number of drinking outlets that are on the go at any one time I would argue that phantoms are no more likely to appear there than elsewhere. When it does happen it just seems to attract media interest. Be that as it may, several bizarre cases of ghost activity have been linked to pubs within the city. In December 1986, events at the Hunter’s Tryst Inn at Oxgangs attracted considerable attention and were investigated by journalist Rab McNeil, who wrote an account of the events. The assistant manageress, Rena, reported that she had actually seen the phantom said to be haunting the place. She recalled:



It was like a mist, but you could see the figure. She seemed young, but as she had her back to me I couldn’t actually see her face. She had a long blue dress on with a bustle at the back, and she wore a small crinoline sort of cap. She just floated down the restaurant. I was in the kitchen at the time and I saw her move towards the coffee lounge. There was nothing said. I wasn’t frightened. There was nothing evil about it at all.





Haunted ‘Hunter’s Tryst’ long time scene of ghostly events.

The Hunter’s Tryst appears to have existed as long ago as the 1740s and was a popular meeting place for Edinburgh citizens as, at the time, it lay well outside the city’s boundary and a visit there was on a par with taking a ramble in the countryside. Interestingly, it also had a reputation as a haunted spot. As far back as the 1870s, at a time when the building had been converted into a farmhouse, it was alleged that it suffered from the presence of a strange entity. The being appeared to have no good intentions and was described as the ‘Devil’ or ‘Satan’. Reports of the incidents suggest that, during this phase at least, the phenomena resembled more that of poltergeist activity rather than a true haunting. The whole building would shake while groans and shrieks echoed through the rooms. Plates were thrown around and smashed to the floor in the early hours of the morning while the family slept. An unearthly staccato of drumbeats would travel up and down the roof. Attempts were made to exorcise the demon by ministers of the Kirk, but they were not successful and the poltergeist continued to be active. Eventually, however, true to the pattern of behaviour of this ‘spirit’ the disturbance stopped by itself.

Events reported in the 1980s, however, did not repeat those of a century before, though there was little doubt among those who worked there that ‘something’ was still present at the Hunter’s Tryst. Shortly after she started working there, the manageress, Marilyn, became aware that there was a different ‘aura’ than that usually found in a pub:



I felt there was definitely something in the place. The atmosphere would go cold. One Sunday I locked up and took my two dogs out for a walk. Suddenly, when I looked back, the whole place lit up like a Christmas tree. I checked the burglar alarm. It was still working, but it hadn’t gone off.



Other members of staff, past and present, were convinced that there was an eerie atmosphere and felt nervous about locking up at night on their own. Several confirmed that after they had closed the inn and turned all the lights off, they would come back on as soon as they walked away from the premises. Staff denied that this could be put down to an electrical fault and believed that something more sinister was at work. A friend of those who worked there, Mike, described what had happened on one occasion:



The bar was closed and I was waiting for [a member of staff]. The light had been left on in the coffee lounge. Because of the room’s ghostly reputation the barmaids were not keen to go and switch off the light. So I went. I found the temperature dramatically reduced in the room. It was not a fault in the heating or anything like that. It was something totally different. A kind of cold. It made the hairs on the back of my head stand on end. I switched the light off, then came back down the unlit corridor. The light in the room came back on again. I was startled. I asked the girls if they had switched the light on from the bar as a joke. But they said it wasn’t possible. I eventually persuaded myself to go back and put the light off again. This time, as far as I remember, it stayed off.



Mike added, ‘The incident I experienced certainly can’t be explained by an electrical fault.’

It’s undoubtedly true that most ghosts are witnessed inside an enclosed space, but there are many reports of phantoms encountered in a street or on open ground. Why should this be? Several apparitions have been witnessed along Constitution Street. One is of an elderly lady in an old-fashioned dress clutching a posy. Normally, she has been seen in the evening walking from the direction of Coatfield Lane and fading as she turns the corner of Queen Charlotte Street. A number of witnesses have claimed to have encountered a man in Highland rig-out running down the centre of the road at the dead of night and simply disappearing, as if he had vanished into a black hole.

An explanation for the frequent sightings of ghosts in Constitution Street emerged with the excavations carried out by archaeologists as roads were being dug up in preparation for the city’s new tram lines. It appears that when Constitution Street was constructed in 1790, it was built over part of the cemetery that once adjoined the old South Leith Parish Church. Archaeologists estimated that around 300 bodies lay beneath the then new street. It is well known by psychics that the disturbance of a graveyard in this way can lead to the phantoms of some of the dead appearing in the area, although the reason for this is obscure. It will be interesting to see if, over the next few years, there is an increase in sightings of ghosts and similar entities.

However things develop in Consitution Street, it may be a while before it reaches the level of events in the ‘Old Town’. The Royal Mile is well known as the place where a spectre might be encountered and the activity of spirits of the dead shows no sign of quietening down. In September 1998, I was contacted by a witness who reported a strange incident he had experienced. Jim wrote:



About two weekends ago I came down the Canongate at about 1 p.m. I stopped at Calton Road intending to cross. I glanced to my left looking for traffic. There was no traffic coming, but I had a glimpse of a young woman who appeared to be looking up Calton Road towards the East End. She was wearing a long brown dress with a hood, which was down on her shoulders. Her dress was tied in the middle with what looked like piping, with the ends hanging down the front. My impression was that she was standing between a window and a door. I thought she was in fancy dress. I intended to have a better look after I had checked for traffic. I looked back to my left and she was gone. The street was empty. There was nowhere for her to go. I realised I had seen a ghost. I have been back to the site and there is, indeed, the shape of a window on the wall of the cemetery. The door I ‘thought’ I saw is not there.





South Leith Parish Church on Constitution Street. Has digging up the road alongside, once the site of a cemetery, disturbed the spirits of the long dead?

Jim enclosed a drawing of the woman he had seen and, if the style of dress is anything to go by, then she certainly looks as if she could be the phantom of a lady from the fifteenth century. Those familiar with the city’s geography will realise that Jim’s encounter took place close to the Scottish Parliament site and Holyrood; an area which is particularly prone to paranormal influences.

However, in at least one instance, a phantom in the street was captured on camera. Every investigator has been looking for the ghost photo that will prove the phenomenon is real and not a mere figment of the imagination. One of the most puzzling was caught by David Knott early one morning in August 1987. He was taking snaps of the Old Town including the Royal Mile. He wanted to make sure that he could get photographs of the buildings without people in the way and that was why he was out and about in the ‘wee hours’. However, when David developed the film he had shot he was surprised to see a strange looking figure standing on the pavement at Castle Hill. He was certain that there had been no one there when he had taken the photo as he had made sure the area was completely deserted. At first glance, the figure looked like a woman dressed in a black shroud. Closer examination, however, revealed what appeared to be a man’s head emerging from the shroud. The figure, when compared to the height of a window in the wall behind, was no more than three feet tall. There are possible explanations for some aspects of the photo. If it is a ghost then it may be that two apparitions were photographed who are bonded together in, and therefore appear together from the spirit world. On the other hand, it is often reported that spirits seem to be walking at a level lower than the present day, which may reflect the lie of the ground at the time they died. In this case, there’s little doubt that the street levels have changed significantly over the years and this could explain why the phantom appeared to be small, as the lower part of its body was hidden beneath the level of the pavement and could not be seen.

There are some places more than others where you might expect to encounter a ghost. Hospitals are one such spot and though incidents do occur they do not appear to be as frequent as might be expected. Or, perhaps, doctors and nurses are simply less likely to report such an encounter, in the same way that airline pilots are reluctant to report UFO sightings for fear of questions being raised about their competence. In the early 1970s, Ellen was working as a night-duty nurse at the Western General. As she walked back to the ward where her patients were she saw, coming towards her, an elderly looking woman, wearing a nightdress, which immediately struck Ellen as being rather old-fashioned even for mature women of the time. However, her main concern was to get the lady back to bed as there was no reason for her to be in this part of the hospital. She was about to ask her which ward she had come from when she was horror-struck to notice that the woman’s legs had disappeared through the floor. Paralysed as a thousand thoughts ran through her mind Ellen stared as the lady kept on walking towards her and then passed right through her body. It was an experience which traumatised her for some considerable time.





Do phantoms from the city’s distant past still haunt the Royal Mile? Drawing of a ghost encountered by a witness in the Canongate.

A staff nurse working at a different city hospital was another who got a shock while on night duty. She was alone in a high-dependency room checking that everything was in order to receive a patient. Suddenly she became aware of a presence and glancing at the bed saw a man lying there with a tube inserted in his throat. The vision then faded before her eyes.

It’s often said that children are more aware than adults of the presence of phantoms. On a ward a defibrillator machine kept switching itself on and off. At the same time as this was happening staff kept seeing a child wearing old-fashioned striped pyjamas wandering around. They ordered him back to bed repeatedly only to discover eventually that the ‘patient’ didn’t exist. It was an apparition of some kind. Meanwhile the ‘defib’ machine kept acting up. As it was doing so one night, and staff were trying to sort it out, a young patient, Andrew, came over and said, ‘Billy! Stop playing with the machine!’ Immediately it went off. Andrew told the nurses that he had been watching ‘Billy’, a boy in striped pyjamas, playing with it.

The dead, or some of them at least, appear determined to hang on to us. Mary King’s Close has earned a reputation as a hotbed of ghostly activity although it is not clear why this should be the case. It was, allegedly, shut down after an outbreak of bubonic plague in the seventeenth century with the implication that many died here or, more brutally, were left to die in agony from the effects of this deadly bacterium. The site was eventually re-opened as ground was needed to house a growing population and so, in 1685, Thomas Coltheart moved in with his wife to a smart new flat. He was shortly to regret it. One afternoon, feeling unwell, Coltheart lay in his bed with his wife sitting beside him, reading to him. Suddenly, she became aware of an object to the left of her and, turning around, was confronted by the sight of a head, with no body, hanging in mid-air. Even worse was the fact that the eyes seemed alive and were staring straight at her. Mrs Coltheart fainted.

It seems that Thomas had not seen the phantom head at this point so it may have vanished immediately after his wife’s encounter. However, that night, soon after he had gone to bed, the head appeared again and, as in his wife’s case, the eyes kept staring directly at him. Coltheart’s prayers for help went unanswered and he could not make the apparition go away. The gateway to another world had, for whatever reason, been well and truly opened. The head was next joined by the phantom of a child which also hung in mid-space and, bizarrely, by an arm which, in the manner of a clip from a horror film, attempted to shake Coltheart’s hand. But that wasn’t all. The apparition of a dog appeared, followed by a cat and what are described as ‘other and stranger creatures’. These entities swarmed all over the floor. It must have appeared like a vision out of hell. And then suddenly it was all over. Coltheart prayed again for relief and, whether it was coincidence or not, there was a sudden noise resembling a groan and all the spirit intruders disappeared in a flash.

Coltheart, apparently, stayed in the house and there is a strange postscript to the events. On the night some years later when he passed away, a close friend staying in Tranent was woken by the family nurse who had been disturbed by the appearance of what looked like a cloud whirling round the room. The cloud gradually condensed and as it did so it took on the shape of a man; a man they recognised as Thomas Coltheart. The phantom was asked if he was indeed Thomas and why he had appeared to them. According to the account, ‘The ghost held up his hand three times, shaking it towards them and vanished’. If Thomas had a message to impart the content was not clear. But it certainly gives the impression that it was a warning of some kind. Coltheart’s friend rushed over to Mary King’s Close to learn that Thomas was indeed dead.

Not so far from here, at a spot on Castle Hill, once stood the palace of Mary of Guise, the French-born wife of King James V. The palace itself was demolished as long ago as 1845, but before then the premises had been split into apartments and rented to families. A prized remnant of its one-time glory was an oak-panelled door that, in one of the flats, separated the bedroom from a linked smaller room. But this apartment was also haunted. Several family members reported hearing the slow but deliberate footsteps of a man coming up the stairs then approaching the bedroom door. The door did not open, but the phantom came right through it. He looked old, but wore a distinctive green coat with two yellow buttons on the back, and yellow trousers. Research later revealed that the clothes matched the livery of Mary of Guise’s household and it was even suggested that this could be the outfit of her court jester. Those who saw the phenomenon testified that the apparition looked as solid as you or I, but passed right through the ancient oak door before disappearing.

But if the door was somehow linked to the appearance of the ghost, is there any proof that anything happened after the palace was pulled down? There is some evidence to suggest that this was indeed the case. As a relic of Mary of Guise’s time in the city, the door became the property of the Museum of Antiquities. I have been told that on a number of occasions a figure, wearing brightly coloured clothes, was seen mounting the stairs in the Queen Street building and then disappearing. Was this the same spectre? It’s hard to be sure without more evidence or being certain of the ancient door’s location. However, spirits it seems can become as attached to particular objects as any of the living.

We can, of course, too readily assume that when a phantom is seen we are dealing with a spirit of a dead person. Some incidents, however, suggest that this is not always the case and do raise some issues over just what we are dealing with. In 1991, Mary was sitting in the living room of her bungalow in Blackhall. There had been nothing out of the ordinary during the day, nor was there any crisis that she was aware of to distract her from the 101 things that a woman juggles to make sure that a household runs properly. In fact, as she relaxed in the armchair she was thinking about nothing in particular. Suddenly, she became aware of her daughter sitting in the chair opposite. Not as a phantom, but as solid as a real person. Mary sat up startled. Her daughter lived hundreds of miles away in Paris, so what on earth was she doing in the house? And how had she got there? Mary, having recovered, from the shock, was about to say something when her daughter started to dissolve in front of her eyes and simply disappeared. This was even more disturbing and Mary didn’t know what to make of it. She knew that Christine was alive and well, but the horrible thought struck her that maybe something had happened to her and she had, in classic fashion, been visited by her ghost. She immediately got on the phone to Paris and was hugely relieved to hear her daughter’s voice on the line. She was alive and well, but she did have some emotional news to impart. She and her husband had decided to separate. It had been a desperately trying time and she had struggled to come to terms with telling her mother. So had this emotional conflict somehow generated a doppelganger to warn Mary of the crisis taking place hundreds of miles away?

Sometimes apparitions can be confusing. What are we dealing with? An angel from heaven? A spirit of the dead? A messenger from another world? In February 1978, a woman was renting a cottage in East Lothian. Out of the blue something happened which was to drastically change her view of the world. As she recalled:



Around a quarter to seven in the morning I was woken by a warm sensation all over my body. I opened my eyes and I saw rays of exceptionally bright light though it didn’t hurt my eyes. Within seconds an image started to appear. A woman with long, blonde, shoulder length hair, an aquiline nose, very soft looking skin with a glow, wearing a long satin silky robe down to her feet with a blue sash. On the feet were gold sandals and a rose on the toes. All the time the apparition was there I felt a great warmth through my body almost like a heavenly feeling of great comfort. I felt totally relaxed. I was overcome with joy. I cannot find words to describe it exactly. The rays of light coming out from the head of the vision lasted throughout the sighting. It gradually faded away altogether.



This encounter appears to have been an almost pleasurable experience, if that is an appropriate word for the presence of a phantom. Other incidents strike you as rather more poignant. In 2006, Des, a former engineer, described an event he had experienced some years before when he had been visiting friends at a Stockbridge flat. He told me:



We’d had a late night as we hadn’t seen each other for a couple of years even though we’d been good friends, having met when we were all at Edinburgh Uni. I went to bed in the early hours expecting to get to sleep as by then I was feeling drowsy and I’d had a fair bit to drink. However, I found I couldn’t drop off which, at first, I put down to the fact that I was in a strange bed in a strange room. Then I began to wonder. I had the sensation that there was ‘something’ in the atmosphere of the room that was stopping me getting off to sleep. It was now about 3 a.m. and I had been lying with my eyes shut for ages though still awake. It was then that I heard the sounds of someone crying very softly and I knew straight away it was a child. My friends did not have any children, but this was quite clearly coming from within the room I was in as it was getting louder as it came nearer the bed. Then the foot of the bed sank down as if a person had sat on it. I immediately looked up in surprise and I saw a little girl in pyjamas sitting there at the end of the bed. I’d guess she was maybe ten or eleven years old. She was sobbing. I don’t doubt what I saw as there was a bright aura surrounding her and everything stood out clearly even to the dark fringe of her hair that fell down one cheek. I was then shocked to notice bloodstains across her pyjama top. I’d been more fascinated than terrified up to that point, but, I admit, the sight of that made me jump out of bed and utter an army type exclamation. The girl then disappeared. I turned on the light and had a good look around, but nothing. I didn’t sleep much after that. I agonised over whether to mention it to my friends, but, curiosity got the better of me and I decided that I would. They, as it turned out, were a bit embarrassed saying that another friend had seen something in the room, but as they themselves hadn’t had any similar experience in the two years they had been there, and others had slept there with no problems, thought she was simply imagining it. They had heard of no rumours or stories about anything having happened in the flat so could not explain what lay behind the little girl’s appearance. I tried a bit of research, but I have been unable to discover any event that would account for it.



Sometimes ghosts seem to haunt a place for a while then just disappear. A house on Craigmillar Park in Newington was visited by the same apparition for several years, but has never, apparently, been seen since. Those who saw him described him as a small, grey-haired man with rounded shoulders, invariably wearing a dressing gown tightly tied round the middle with a cord. The house where the events took place was over 100 years old so there had been plenty of time, you might guess, for a variety of residents to have lived there, died there and to have become very attached to it. Margaret, who owned the house and who described the series of incidents, glimpsed the apparition in the summer of 1914, just before World War I began. She was in the dining room making a frock when she suddenly felt a cold breeze which lifted her hair high above her head. Startled, Margaret looked up and caught sight of a small man walk through the main door, which was lying open, then stand beside the staircase. Wondering who he was and why he had come in unannounced she stopped what she was doing and walked quickly into the hall, only to discover that there was no one there. She couldn’t explain it as there was no way that the man could have got away without her being aware of it. He had simply vanished.

A few years later, Margaret was sitting upstairs in the drawing room which was, as it happened, situated directly above the room where she had been when the earlier experience occurred. At around midnight she decided to go downstairs to pick up a few things. As she did so she saw the same man standing in the identical spot at the bottom of the stairs where she had first seen him. As she watched he disappeared before her eyes. Margaret saw him on one more occasion, some time later in 1923. She was lying in her bedroom, which was located on the ground floor, when she awoke suddenly at around about two in the morning. A strange urge which she couldn’t explain led her to open the bedroom door. As she did so she saw the man again walking through the hall. He seemed to disappear into the wall. She never saw him again.

Margaret did not feel frightened by the spectre’s appearance and, indeed, felt that every time she saw him something pleasant tended to happen. It has to be said that this is an unusual experience as the sighting of a ghost has tended to be thought of as the harbinger of bad news. But, even though she did not find his appearance disturbing, she was curious to know who the phantom might be. Eventually, she was told by a long-standing resident in the area that the house had, at one time, been occupied by an individual whose appearance fitted her description of the apparition. However, there is no way of knowing whether this was accurate or simply shoe-horning an explanation into the event. It would, however, be in keeping with what psychics say about ghosts, that some of them do not wish to leave a place where they have had happy memories or some tragedy has taken place. It would be interesting to learn whether the same phantom had ever re-appeared. However, domestic residences can only be investigated by invitation when the owners are willing to allow investigators in. Other buildings, less personal and unoccupied, however, offer a fascination of their own. The ghost phenomenon can more easily be researched at such sites.

On 3 October 1998, together with members of the Scottish Earth Mysteries Research group, I entered the Niddry Street Vaults just before midnight having been given permission by Mercat Tours to stay there overnight. The area occupied by the ‘Vaults’ was at one time the location, during the eighteenth century, of various shops and apartments. When the South Bridge was erected the ‘Vaults’ area was built over though the shops were left as open premises. They became derelict and eventually abandoned. However, the empty shells of the shops, their walls and windows intact, can still be visited down a long flight of stairs inside a dark and dingy subterranean cavern. You will then find yourself within this long-forgotten shopping arcade. Forgotten? Not by the phantoms of those who once worked there it seems and there have been many reports of ghosts sighted and strange events witnessed.

Accompanying me on this investigation were Brian Wilson and psychic medium, Katrina McNab, among others. Katrina quickly identified several of what are known as ‘cold spots’. Cold spots are, as the name suggests, areas where the temperature is much lower than the surrounding air. They are often linked with the appearance of a ghost. Odd incidents then started to happen. Brian Wilson noted that:





Entrance to Niddry Vaults: site of the legendary ‘underground city’. ‘Ghostbusters’ have experienced ‘cold spots’, phantoms and spirit faces here.



Ron tried to make vocal notes on his Dictaphone, but complained that he could not get it to work. He tried several times to tape his notes, but it just would not respond. Only when coming out of the room did the Dictaphone work and this startled us. Ron went back into the room and again the machine would not work. Then when he came back out into the hall suddenly it started to work again.



I remember thinking at the time that the refusal of the device to work in that area was truly odd and I was glad that there were people present to confirm it as I would not have believed it myself. I normally had no problem with it whatsoever and it did start working when I moved away from that particular area so what caused it to malfunction was a mystery. As Brian wrote we ‘felt the hairs on our head stand on end.’

As we wandered down the central street with the various rooms, the former shops, on either side of us, Katrina sensed the atmosphere thicken and become more dense. She complained of feeling sick. As we walked into the remains of the old workshops Katrina identified one where jewellery was made and the place where a butcher’s once stood, as she experienced an overwhelming sensation of blood flowing. Having, after an hour or so, completed our initial look round we decided to locate ourselves in the larger room and got ready to set up the video equipment. We had three video cameras with us, but were startled to discover that the first video camera would not work. Surprised, we set up the second. That wouldn’t work either. Was it simply coincidence? We had brought a third camera. That refused to work too and when we attempted to eject a tape from the camera nothing happened. We were extremely frustrated at this point as the cameras were a key part of the night’s investigation. Katrina informed us that the spirits present were playing a trick on us and that there was nothing that we could do about it ourselves.

This did, indeed, seem to be the case. After we had sat around disconsolately for half an hour one of the cameras suddenly started to work again, out of the blue. As we now had only one camera operational we agreed to focus it on Katrina as she appeared to be in strong communication with the spirits. She told us that ‘a hooded priest or holy man was sitting watching us at the top left-hand corner of the room and that he was telling her that he had come here centuries ago when someone was dying and gave them the last rites.’ As Katrina was in contact with the spirits a face, like that of a man smoking, appeared on the wall behind and at an angle to where she was sitting. This could be clearly seen on the video clip. In fact, several strange features had been recorded, but this only became clear later. We left the Vaults in the early hours of 4 October and, to our surprise, but not to Katrina’s, the two video cameras immediately started to work. It was hard to fathom it all.

We had taken around thirty photographs. This, of course, was in pre-digital days and when we had a chance to look at these the results were astonishing. Brian recalls:



There was one photo which really got my attention. It was the picture of the hallway where there appeared to be two alien type faces/skulls on the photo. I then scanned this into my computer and started to blow up the picture. It convinced me even more that this was definitely not a trick of the brickwork. I went back into the Vaults to check the brickwork and where the alien faces are there were no bricks at all, but a gap in the side wall. This convinced me that light or background walls played no part in the image. It was so convincing that the Evening News had a look at it and analysed it, then published it.



Individuals who suspect that a ghost has invaded their home often look to an investigator to confirm that what is happening is not simply down to their imagination. In December 1995, I visited a modern house near the Royal Mile where, the occupant felt, there had been some paranormal disturbance. Judith explained to me the background to the events, which she believed could not be accounted for by any normal explanation. She told me that her mother had died over a year before of a serious illness in the house where she, Judith, lived. She had in fact, met her death in the sitting room, where we were meeting at that moment. Judith told me that she could sense her mother’s presence and felt sudden drops in temperatures which coincided with the ‘arrival’ of her mother. She confirmed that she could not see her, but was aware of her being there with her. Judith’s son confirmed that he too sensed his granny in the house. A curious fact, Judith added, was that the neighbour’s dog would not come into the sitting room although before her mother’s death it would wander in without any problem. It’s an often reported fact that animals appear to have a sixth sense for detecting phantoms from the spirit world.

Judith told me of a range of other odd events which had occurred following her mum’s death. A month after she died the front door had opened then shut on its own. Since then the sitting room door, and other doors, would open and close for no apparent reason, but it seemed to coincide with the presence of her mother’s spirit. As in many cases of haunting the spirit seemed to link to one specific area and that was the sitting room, but she seemed to come at no particular hour and Judith sensed her presence at a variety of times during the day. Sometimes she was aware of her being there because she could smell the scent her mother used to wear. There was a chair in the room close to Judith’s own and she felt that her mother’s spirit would often sit down there beside her. There were aspects to the case which you might have expected, but weren’t present. No objects had been moved and, apart from doors being opened by an invisible hand, there was no other clear physical manifestation of a ghost’s presence. Nor had Judith or her son been aware of any coloured balls of light or anything resembling that phenomenon which often indicates that the spirit of a dead person is present. However, a spirit appearance can take many forms and we might expect that a mother, having passed to the ‘beyond,’ would be likely to make her presence felt to those she was close to in life.

Shortly after her mother died Mary was standing at the kitchen sink washing up some dishes in her home at East Restalrig. She was thinking about nothing in particular, but was suddenly disturbed by a voice whispering ‘Mary’ in her ear. She spun round expecting to find someone behind her, but the kitchen was empty. She could, however, sense a presence although of whom she could not say. Nor could she recognise the voice that had called her name. There was one odd thing though. Her dog would at times run to the top of the stairs and look down as if he was aware of someone coming up the stairs though when Mary went to look there would be no one there.

However, it is clear that things other than personal affection attract phantoms of the dead. It is said that no true actor can resist a curtain call. And that, it seems, applies to ghosts as well. Edinburgh’s ‘Theatre Royal’ once stood in Shakespeare Square. The strange events that took place there were reported by the Jackson family who, at the end of the eighteenth century, lived in a flat above the theatre. Apparently, once the regular performance was over and the building had been shut for the night strange noises could be heard coming from the auditorium. It was the sounds of movement and the echo of voices as if the plays performed there for a living public were being repeated again by a cast of apparitions for a truly phantom audience. Those who went in when they heard these sounds claimed to see figures flitting across the stage, but which would disappear immediately like a will-o’-the-wisp.

It’s not clear who the ghosts involved in this instance might have been, but in the case of the Festival Theatre it is claimed that the apparition seen there in recent years is that of a famous performer. On 9 May 1911, Sigmund Neuburgher, who used the stage name the ‘Great Lafayette’ and had a reputation as a leading magician of the time, died when fire broke out in the Empire Theatre, Nicolson Street, during his act. He was buried in Piershill cemetery. What might seem more natural than the spirit of such a legendary performer seeking to return to the stage, especially to the very one where he played his final curtain? However, no known sightings of the spirit of Lafayette were made till the 1990s, by which time the ‘Empire’ had been reconstructed and re-emerged as the ‘Festival Theatre’. The age of the ‘Great Lafayette’ was only a distant memory. He, however, had most definitely not been forgotten so when a tall, dark apparition was encountered backstage, at the spot where it is said the fire began back in May 1911, it was identified immediately as that of Lafayette. Several sightings then followed including that of a figure, around six feet tall, gliding though the stalls. I have also been told of a phantom wrapped in a dark cloak, arms outspread, having been seen on the stage itself after the theatre had closed and the audience and most staff had left. Lafayette playing to empty seats? It seems out of character and it might be wondered if we really are dealing with the ghost of the great performer. Given the fleeting sightings and the time that has elapsed since his tragic death, it is hard to be definite about who this might be. On the other hand, the fact that he did die in terrible circumstances at this spot does suggest that he has a strong link to the theatre. It also has to be remembered that the sightings took place after the theatre was renovated and, as is often the case, changing a building does seem to stir up the spirits of those connected to it. This may well explain why Lafayette reappeared after such a long gap in time.





Burial place of the ‘Great Lafayette’ – does the ghost of the famous actor still haunt the stage of the Festival Theatre where he was killed by fire in 1911?

Almost every theatre in the city, past and present, seems to have a ghostly association. The Royal Lyceum has been visited by a phantom ‘blue lady’ seen, apparently, in a gallery. The figure waves a hand before vanishing into the ether. It has been suggested that this could be the apparition of the nineteenth-century actress Ellen Terry, perhaps better known these days as the secret, long-standing mistress of Charles Dickens. A chalk statue of her, it is said, used to stand in the theatre’s foyer. However, the link between the ghost and Terry may be no more than speculation. There are several instances of theatre phantoms being recognised as the spirits of those who once worked there, as has been suggested may be the case of a ghost encountered at the Playhouse Theatre. There have been reports, stretching back many years, that the building is haunted. Incidents have included alarms going off when no one is in the building, lights switching on by themselves, unexplained cold spots and sightings of a hazy figure. No famous actor, however, has been put forward as the dead spirit behind these events. It is said that a night watchman hanged himself in the 1950s, in the building, and his troubled spectre could still be present doing his rounds as he did in life. However, it is also rumoured that a stage technician who died in an accident behind the scenes, but who loved his job, might be the phantom reluctant to leave the place he loved so much. It’s said that he was a bit of a practical joker and might still enjoy playing games with those in the land of the living.

More recently, in 2007, Bill White experienced a strange encounter in the King’s Theatre at Tollcross. Bill was anxious to assure me that he was not a natural believer in the paranormal and was a ‘down to earth’ type. In fact his job in IT might suggest, he joked, that he was a bit of a ‘nerd’. ‘What happened’, he told me, ‘came right out of the blue.’



We’re not avid theatre goers, but we do like to see a play from time to time. On this occasion, when the interval came, my wife decided to nip to the loo while I went to the bar to order drinks as there can be a bit of a queue. Sue was going to join me as soon as she could. I’d been there several times so thought I knew my way, but this time for some reason I got lost. It seems odd given the number of people about but I suddenly found myself on my own heading up a flight of stairs. I was going up and up and then the stairs simply came to a dead end against a solid wall. The realisation hit me that I had obviously gone the wrong way. I cursed myself for being stupid and thinking I’d maybe not have enough time to get the drinks in, so I started to go back down as quick as I could. It was then that I saw it. It happened so quickly that it was over before I realised what had happened. A woman, and I’m sure it was a woman, came up the stairs towards me. But she was floating above the level of the steps. One part of my mind reeled in shock and the other part refused to believe it. She was wearing old-fashioned style clothes that’s all I can say as the next second she had passed by me and literally disappeared into the wall. I have never moved so fast down a set of stairs in my life. When at last I got to the bar Sue was there and asked me — rather indignantly — where I had been and what the matter was. She could see I was not my usually calm self. When I told her, she didn’t believe me at first. I could hardly believe it myself. After the play finished we went to see if we could find the stairs again. But we drew a blank. I felt too awkward to ask staff about it. But I’ve wondered if anyone else had seen the same thing.



In my experience theatres appear to generate more ghosts than cinemas do, though I’m not sure why that should be the case. Could it be because they tend to be older, or because theatres are populated by actors and not simply the images of those who are broadcast on the silver screen? In the 1960s, I was a regular attendee at a cinema called the ‘Poole’s Synod Hall’; a rather dilapidated building which stood on Castle Terrace to the rear of the Usher Hall. It was demolished a long time ago and the site stood empty and unused for many years. However, before then it was a real magnet for those who loved watching horror films. It was in the days when films deemed suitable for those over eighteen were X-rated, but staff at Poole’s were never too fussy about how old you were and, provided you appeared approximately in your teens, you would be let in. It was a tense moment though as you asked for a ticket wondering if you would be refused admission. I was there many times, but had no psychic encounter of any kind. However, many years later, while investigating a haunting in another part of the city I met Rob and learnt that he had once worked at Poole’s. He told me that in his view the building had definitely been haunted, though patrons might not have been aware of it as incidents tended to happen when the place was empty. He said that at times it could be quite unsettling. On one occasion he was clearing rubbish upstairs when, behind him, he heard seats suddenly banging down as if someone was sitting on them. He knew the seats could not do it by themselves as they were on a spring mechanism. So, when he turned round to look, he expected to see someone there, but the seats were empty. Mystified, though not unduly disturbed thinking there must be an obvious explanation, he went to take a look. He had almost reached the row when the seats shot back up again one after another with a distinct thud. Next he heard seats bang down close to the spot where he had been working just the moment before. Glancing round he noticed that a kind of haze seemed to be building up at the edge of the balcony. Rob admitted that he lost his cool and left as quickly as possible. ‘I was edgy working there on my own after that’, he admitted.

However, if odd things happen at your place of work you at least have the security of knowing that it is possible to escape the attention of the dead. It’s a different matter when you are forced to experience it in your own home. By the 1990s, a family had been living in their flat beside the Meadows for nearly forty years. The woman, Ella, who had bought it, was aware before she had moved in that a man had committed suicide in the area that she now used as her bedroom. He had hung himself by a noose suspended from the ceiling. That could explain, she had guessed, why the price had been reduced to a level at which she could afford to buy it. However, in some ways, there was a cost to pay. The spirit of the suicide seemed determined to maintain contact with the site of his death and the family could not escape his presence. As Susan, Ella’s daughter, told me:



I saw a face, a man’s face, pure white floating through the kitchen door. My mum went into the bedroom where my dad was in bed as he had been feeling unwell. The phantom was there too. My mum got such a fright that she shouted out ‘go away’ and threw her arm out. It went straight through it. We didn’t like it, but we just lived with it. Another time, a friend, Andy, was in the house and saw a man going up the stairs with Jesus-type sandals on. He just disappeared.



However, perhaps it wasn’t simply a question of a suicide haunting the place where he had met his end. Maybe there was an aura about the flat which somehow allowed the spirits of the dead to make their presence felt, as other events suggest? Tragically, Susan’s brother, Bill, died at a comparatively early age. On the day of the funeral Ella, feeling the pressure of it all, was lying on the bed. As Susan described it, ‘She heard someone open the back door and then walk in. She got up to see who it was and saw Bill standing on the stairs. “I’m all right” was all he said and then disappeared.’ Interestingly, there appears to have been physical effects of the presence of ‘something’. On a number of occasions Ella heard noises in the back room and when she went to investigate found condensation on the window, as if someone had been standing there looking out — something that Bill, apparently, used to do. A few incidents, however, bordered on those associated with a poltergeist. From time to time, Susan felt a pressure on her stomach, as if something was pressing down on her and a round white circular indentation would appear. On one occasion she was thrown across her bedroom by an invisible force. However, unlike the determined poltergeist presence these incidents were exceptional and did not turn into a series of events.

It is difficult to understand why ghosts appear on some occasions and not on others. And why they visit some individuals, though many, if not most of us, pass through life without ever encountering a phantom from the ‘other side’. However, few will deny that Edinburgh, and especially its heart in the ‘Old Town’, is a place where ghosts, in all their varied guises, seem more willing than anywhere else to present themselves. And even in the twenty-first century these ‘visits’ show no sign of dying out. Quite the opposite, in fact.





7


Phantoms of the Sky?


UFOs hovering over Princes Street? Alien beings abducting people from moving vehicles? Can such events really be taking place in and around Scotland’s capital city? In November 1993, at 5.20 p.m. Sheena Williamson, daughter of ‘Flower of Scotland’ composer Roy Williamson, was walking along Princes Street, on the shop side heading for the Caledonian hotel. Sheena explained what happened next:



Suddenly I saw a ball of fire flying through the black night sky at a speed so fast that I shrieked and took hold of my son’s hand as I pointed it out. This ball of fire was going faster than any aeroplane or meteor or satellite. I kept thinking it would explode or disappear but it just kept travelling in a level and very straight direction. I lost sight of it as it went over the roofs of the shops I was standing beside. It seemed to come from the south and be heading north. There was no sound with it otherwise I would have thought it was simply one of those fast jets the air force use, but even those aren’t fast enough for a comparison with what I saw.



What is so strange, but so typical of Sheena’s experience, is that though the incident happened in the busiest of streets no one else came forward who claimed to have witnessed the event. But that, surprisingly, is the norm. UFO sightings tend to have few witnesses no matter where they take place, which does raise a question over the exact nature of what is being seen. Is it a psychic experience? Or is it a window into another dimension which opens so briefly that only the fortunate observer will catch sight of it? Whatever the explanation, encounters from across the city would surely convince even the most sceptical that something strange is going on in the skies above us, and may also allow us to draw a conclusion as to exactly what that ‘something’ is.

Sightings in the city have a lengthy pedigree. As far back as the 1940s, a witness caught sight of a strange craft hovering over the seaside district of Portobello. At the time Andrew Cherry was a twenty-two year old employed at a bottle works situated in the area. This, the first ever UFO encounter known to have taken place in the city, happened at 5.30 a.m. in July 1947, while Mr Cheery was standing at a bus stop in Baileyfield Road. In the sky he glimpsed a disc-shaped object with what appeared to be a large glass dome on top. The disc looked as if it was made of metal of a ‘rough diamond’ texture. But perhaps strangest of all was the fact that, as the UFO was hovering only three hundred feet above him, Andrew could see ‘someone’ or ‘something’ inside the glass dome. This ‘alien pilot’ wore dark-coloured clothes and was either standing or sitting beside what seemed to be a control panel. The UFO must have been powered by an internal fuel supply as flames were escaping from one side and, at the same time, Andrew could hear a steady humming sound. The area surrounding the object appeared hazy which could have been the result of heat from the power source. The UFO, which was about fifteen feet long, suddenly tilted then disappeared towards the Fife coast in a matter of seconds.

Strangely, the area around Portobello has continued to be a hot spot with several bizarre encounters. In October 1992, Pat Macleod, a policemen’s wife, was driving along Duddingston Park at around 9.50 a.m. making for the local health centre in Mountcastle Drive to keep an appointment. As Pat drove she became aware of an extremely bright flashing light in the sky. Half a mile further on, keeping the light in view, she realised it was getting bigger and the brightness intensifying. In fact it was drawing much closer to her and as it approached she noted that the central sphere of light had a ring, or flange, round it. This reminded Pat of pictures she had seen of the planet Saturn.

At about twenty to thirty feet from the ground the object slowed down and appeared to hover. She could see now just how large the UFO was, which she judged to be about the length of an aircraft wingspan. At regular intervals around the circumference Pat noted squares of light which resembled glowing windows. Pat continued her journey, arriving at the health centre shortly after 10 o’clock, but as she drove she was still able to observe the object. She had turned off the main road down a side street and watched as the UFO veered east, in the opposite direction from her, and gradually descended. It appeared to land in an area of open ground called Niddrie Burn, a valley-shaped expanse of grass with a stream running through the centre. Although this is open land it is surrounded by multi-storey flats. Oddly, not a person came forward to admit to having seen the object. Nor did anyone driving on the road at this time step up as a witness. Pat, however, took the encounter so seriously that she called the police to find out if anyone else had seen the UFO. No one had, but Jon Jeromsom, who ran a plumbing business in Duddingston Park reported that he had been looking out of his showroom window when he saw a bright object descend to around fifty feet from the ground. It hovered for several seconds and then vanished. As this incident took place at 10 a.m., around the same time as Pat’s encounter, it could well have been the same object though the descriptions don’t match exactly. It’s curious too that the encounter with a half-bird half-man creature occurred in this area; an incident dealt with elsewhere in the book. Was there a connection between these two events? It’s possible, though there may be, as I suggest, another potential explanation.

There’s no obvious answer to the puzzle of why UFOs would be attracted to a particular area, but only a few years later Ann, from her home in Niddrie, reported seeing a hovering discshaped object. On 7 June 1995, she woke up in the early hours noting on her bedside clock that it was 2.15 a.m. As Ann described it, ‘for some reason I was drawn to the bedroom window where I drew back the curtains.’ Ann’s flat was on the third floor so she had a good view across the city skyline. Her attention was caught by ‘a slow-moving very low-flying object approaching from the east.’ She watched it come towards her and gradually realised that ‘something wasn’t quite right.’ The object was ‘flying far too low and didn’t have any wings. In other words it wasn’t a plane.’

The object passed Anne’s window about a hundred yards away and only forty-five feet from the ground. It then hovered over the houses opposite her block. She judged it to be about thirty feet across with intense bright red and white lights. The lights, Ann indicated, were a striking feature, especially the red light which she said was enormous; so big that she could actually see inside it and thought that she caught sight of something moving around. The encounter lasted a total of fifteen minutes so Ann had some time to observe the UFO. The picture she drew shows a round object with a rim, red and white lights underneath and a bowl-shaped structure above the rim with what appear to be porthole type windows. It has to be acknowledged that there is continuous traffic into the city airport through the night and there would certainly have been a plane in the sky at around this time. However, it also has to be agreed that Ann had a very good sighting of the object which hovered within feet of her window. It was the very fact that it was not behaving like a plane and was flying so low, that convinced her that she was experiencing something quite out of the ordinary.

Sightings of objects which look for all the world as if they are ‘spacecraft’ may, on the surface, appear to have no direct connection to those experienced by witnesses just a few miles away in Musselburgh. But, some have suggested that there is, in fact, a link, bizarre though that may seem. In the winter of 1981, Mr and Mrs Buckley were walking along the pavement opposite the race track when they spotted an object which they described as being like a brilliant white tennis ball. The ‘ball’ was hovering beside a lamppost about twenty feet up and, at first, the couple weren’t sure exactly what they were seeing, but then it moved. The couple could now observe that there were two balls moving close together and coming towards them. The couple were struck by the intense brilliance of the balls, ‘a fierce white colour’ and like ‘metal boiling hot.’ The balls had descended to about an inch from the pavement and then moved in front of the couple as they continued down the street. To Mr and Mrs Buckley it seemed as if ‘the balls had a mind of their own’ and that they were ‘playing a game with us.’ Intriguingly, one ball gave the impression of being ‘more dominant than the other.’

Intelligent spheres of light the size of a tennis ball? Is there a connection between the nuts-and-bolts UFOs that we have come to accept as the indicators of an alien presence? Mr and Mrs Buckley did not see anything inside these glowing balls, and certainly no alien presence. But that has not been the experience elsewhere. In Australia, the ‘Min Min’ lights around Lake Manchester near Brisbane, in Queensland, are seen regularly. They are glowing balls of light similar to those encountered in Musselburgh, but with one difference. Small alien entities have been observed inside these objects. In his book Earthlights, writer Paul Devereux describes how one witness confronted by an eight-inch ball of light was stunned to see, ‘a tiny, human-like entity inside the sphere. The being was bald, sitting cross-legged with its elbows resting on its knees and was staring intently at the witness.’ There have been several reports similar to that, but not from Edinburgh, nor from Scotland that I’m aware of. But the city has experienced many incidents of glowing balls of light, especially over the Pentland Hills. Could there be some connection to the wider UFO phenomenon? Witnesses in the capital of alien entities have not described encountering such miniature creatures, but given the vast nature of the universe it has to be wondered if anything can be ruled out.

It’s curious that Bob Taylor in his famous encounter on Dechmont Law, on 9 November 1979, described the circular object he saw as not wholly solid as he could see through it to the foliage behind. Bob was a sixty-one-year-old forestry worker for Livingston Development Corporation who, while doing his rounds, came across a strange object hovering, most likely, a few inches above the ground in a clearing in the woods on Dechmont Law. As Bob watched, two spiky balls, like World War II sea mines, emerged from the UFO, rolled across the grass and got hold of Bob’s trousers. He was aware of a pungent smell then passed out. It is not clear how long Bob was unconscious, although at least twenty minutes is the general view, but when he came to and raised the alarm a police investigation followed. No satisfactory conclusion was arrived at to explain what had happened to Bob and it remains one of the most convincing cases in proving the reality of an alien presence. In 1992, I with support from other ufologists persuaded Livingston Development Corporation to erect a cairn and plaque to mark the site and I have been campaigning for a more fitting memorial to this remarkable event. Although it took place some miles outside the city it’s close enough to provide powerful evidence that backs up sightings of strange objects seen over the capital. And these objects, according to some, may be located in underground bases in the hills surrounding Edinburgh.

But why is it that UFOs appear to be attracted to specific objects and locations? In 1962, thirty-two-year-old Charles Farquharson was training to be a teacher at Moray House College. He travelled there on a daily basis from an address in South Queensferry, close to the Forth Railway Bridge. On the day in question he arrived home at around 4.40 p.m. and as there was no one in he decided to make himself a cup of coffee. Charles recalled that ‘it was a lovely clear evening.’ It was so nice that he walked over to the kitchen window to look down the Firth as he had done many times before, never failing to be impressed by the scenery. But this time something unexpected happened. Next to the railway bridge he saw what he described as a ‘flying saucer.’ It was hovering slightly above the bridge at the highest part of the central span. Mr Farquharson judged that it was about thirty feet above the bridge and the same distance to the side. The UFO appeared to be quite still and tilted about twenty-five degrees from the vertical. Charles felt that he could get a good estimate of these distances because the object was close to the bridge and so he had something to compare it to. In addition, Charles had been so intrigued by the sighting that he moved into the garden and stood on the surrounding wall to get a better look. He, therefore, judged the craft to be about twenty feet across. The UFO stayed in position for a quarter of an hour before moving very slowly in a northwards direction, following the line of the railway. It stayed in his line of sight for a further four minutes disappearing in the direction of Cardenden, in Fife. During his observation of the object David noted that it had ‘no features of any kind which interrupted its symmetry.’ The colour he described as like ‘a new penny, burnished cupronickel.’ Charles was convinced that the UFO had been studying the bridge’s construction and, possibly, the rail network in the area. But was it all imagination or even a mirage? He is convinced it was not and with good reason. The witness has an engineering degree and so was in a good position to give a view of the technical qualities of the object seen.





The Forth Railway Bridge – site of many UFO incidents. Could there be a secret alien base located near here?

There is one more telling point. UFOs have been spotted frequently in the area, so Charles’s sighting was by no means a one-off event. In August 1997, several UFOs were seen hovering over the Firth of Forth. Derek Davis was videoing the night skies over the Forth when a circle of bright light caught his attention. He was sure it wasn’t a plane or other natural object as he filmed these at the same time and they did not look anything like it. The object was motionless for several seconds then suddenly disappeared. But a more spectacular sighting had occurred on the 7 October 1990. It was actually the centenary of the opening of the Forth Bridge and the event was being celebrated by a firework display. Was it this what attracted an unidentified object? At around 9.15 p.m. Lyn Livingston, who was watching the display, caught sight of a circular object whose base was made up of intermittent red, blue and white lights. The UFO rotated and twinkled and, as it did so, it appeared to change shape forming a projecting cone of white-coloured lights. The object stayed in position for a full fifteen minutes before, as with the UFO witnessed by David Carter, it drifted towards the Fife coast. The evidence suggests that in both cases the objects had come from the south, that is, from behind the witnesses’ observation point as they were looking north. So why did they stop at the Forth Bridge? One possible answer may be in the experience of Angela who claimed to have had an encounter with humanoid entities while travelling on a train which was crossing the bridge. According to her account, the entities which confronted her explained that they lived in tunnels beneath the Forth Estuary. They did not indicate, however, why they were based there or whether their occupation had any wider purpose.

This sounds undeniably bizarre, but does link with my investigation into other UFO cases in the Edinburgh area and my reassessment of the Burry Man, the festival of uncertain origin that takes place annually in August, in South Queensferry. On the first Friday, one of the villagers dresses up in a strange costume. He is encased from head to foot in a cloth to which have been sown thousands of burr pods. His head is covered by a helmet also covered in burrs except for a small opening for his eyes and mouth. The Burry Man finds it very difficult to move in this outfit and struggles around like one of those clips you see of men walking on the moon. It takes little leap of imagination to link the Burry Man to some wild imitation of a modern astronaut. And before you think it a leap too far it will come as a surprise to learn, perhaps, that similarly dressed figures appear in ceremonies across the world to which are linked tales of visitors from distant planets.

The Kayapo Indians of the Upper Amazon in Brazil have an annual ceremony to mark a strange event. The leading men in the village wrap themselves in suits made from straw. On their heads and necks they place a helmet also made of straw. They are, in fact, completely enclosed from head to foot in this odd garment. As they move around with an awkward shambling gait they undoubtedly resemble the film of astronauts stumbling across the lunar landscape. And, bizarre as it may appear, this is exactly what the Kayapo Indians are commemorating by this ceremony; a visit by a being who claimed to come from the skies. According to their legend one day there was a massive explosion of earth and fire on a nearby hill. Out of the fire came a being that they attacked with spears, but their weapons simply bounced off the gleaming white suit the entity was wearing. Eventually the Kayapo grew less frightened of the being and began to communicate with ‘him’. According to their tradition, the visitor taught them to make medicines which cured the illnesses they had been forced to accept until then as an inevitable part of life. They called the stranger ‘Bep Kororiti’ which translates as ‘I come from space’. One day the visitor left them, wearing the white suit he had on when he first arrived and disappeared in a blast of smoke and fire. As the Kayapo did not write there is no way of finding out when this incident occurred. However, given that these events were first recorded in 1952 and appear to have been part of the folklore for several generations it rules out any suggestion that someone from the earth visited them. However, what is of key interest is the similarity between the Kayapo festival and the Burry Man. Could there be some common memory of visits by extraterrestrials? One is entitled to be sceptical but yet there is a tantalising hint of something so strange that it appears to defy common sense. And though it may defy common sense, the fact remains that, across Edinburgh, individuals repeatedly claim sightings of objects that go by the description of ‘spacecraft.’

In the 1950s, several strange incidents took place around the capital. Were these events connected? The first was serious enough to have the Edinburgh CID called in to investigate. This was a revelation to me as, until I researched this case, I had been under the impression that the only time that the police had been directly involved in investigating a UFO incident was the famous 1979 Bob Taylor UFO encounter at Dechmont. Mary was one of sixteen Edinburgh ‘tattie howkers’, twelve women and four men, returning home one Friday evening around 5 p.m. following a day’s work at a nearby farm nursery. As the lorry they were travelling in drove along Hailes Road, between Musselburgh and the capital, a strange object suddenly swooped down from the sky. It flew behind the vehicle leaving in its wake two distinct vapour trails and followed them for about ten minutes. According to another witness, the UFO had lights on its underside which glowed as it moved along. Mary described an object about the size of a large diningroom table which had a dome both on top and underneath and was light grey in colour. Tony who was also on the lorry described ‘a rim of flame around the ring’ and a ‘silvery green light coming from a small bubble underneath.’ The UFO came so close to those on the lorry that they were forced to duck as it flew over them. Whatever the object was it created panic, with some of the group banging on the cab trying to get the driver’s attention. Oddly, the driver did not see the UFO so ignored his passengers’ frantic efforts. Family members confirmed that when members of the group returned home they appeared quite terrified by the incident. However, the UFO did not appear to have harmed anyone physically and suddenly shot back into the sky, headed towards the Firth of Forth and disappeared. It may have been the same UFO sighted around 5.30 p.m. in Anniesland in Glasgow by two ambulance men, but we can’t be certain of that.

At around the same time, other odd incidents were reported of the kind which ufologists, rightly or wrongly, have linked to UFO sightings. The first of these was a report that the bodies of three dead domestic animals, pigs in this instance, had been seen floating in the River Almond in the Lothians. It may be argued that there is nothing remarkable in this, but what is odd is that the discovery of these carcasses led the police to conduct a search of the river. It’s unclear, given the passage of time, just exactly what they were looking for, or if anything else strange was found. Over the years there have been reports of animals found in bizarre circumstances, as in a mutilated sheep discovered near Edinburgh airport, parts of which appeared to have been surgically cored out. Not long after this, in January 1958, there was a dramatic and unexpected rise in water consumption in the country areas surrounding the city which puzzled representatives of the water department. They eventually explained it rather feebly as individuals running off water to avoid taps freezing over. Although one can see the logic, it has to be asked how many households would it take to cause such a dramatic impact? And why then, and not before or since?

It has been reported worldwide that UFOs appear to hover over and be interested in water sources and especially reservoirs supplying drinking water to cities. And Edinburgh is no exception to such reported incidents. Although there are no known sightings over Edinburgh reservoirs that would coincide with the events of the 1950s, there certainly have been reports of UFOs seen at other times. In January 1997, a couple observed a bright ball of light which appeared to be hovering over the Hopes Reservoir in East Lothian. The object then changed shape and colour, flashing red, blue and purple lights. According to the witnesses the UFO was silent and made no noise. It did though appear to be emitting a shining light which lit up the surrounding area. After about an hour the hovering UFO disappeared as suddenly as it had arrived. Two years earlier, in September 1995, a witness, an ex-RAF man, observed an orange-coloured round object passing over Harlaw Reservoir. And it has also been noted by UFO buffs that the A70 abduction of Gary Wood and Colin Wright occurred near to Harperrig Reservoir. Sinister interpretations have been put on the interest of UFOs in our water supply, although some suggest it’s used for their own purpose possibly as some kind of fuel propellant.

Are UFOs seen in the vicinity of key hills within, or fringing, the city heading there for equally sinister reasons? Blackford Hill has been the scene of several UFO sightings. As far back as October 1966, two school boys, Eric and Stephen, reported a strange object that they both caught sight of. Chatting in Gladstone Terrace around 8 p.m. they suddenly noticed what they described as ‘a flying saucer’ appear in the evening sky. They judged it to be around a half mile away when first seen and noted it was heading straight down in the direction of Blackford Hill. Both witnesses were sure the object was not a plane. They described it as having white, red and blue lights on top and a circle of lights around its base. Although it’s not certain from the surviving evidence, the report seems to suggest that the object was disc-shaped. It’s also not clear whether or not anyone else witnessed this event, which is puzzling when you consider that the UFO’s lights were flashing and that flames were pouring out of a rounded tail area.

What is notable is just how much activity there was with regard to UFOs in Edinburgh in the 1950s and ’60s, and the extent to which the capital took a spot on the world stage. As far back as January 1959, a Flying Saucer Club was formed by John Spark and, by April of the same year, the Scottish UFO Research Society as it was called had two branches, one in Edinburgh and a second in the Lothians. The society was actively involved in the visit of George Adamski to the city in May 1959. Adamski was visiting Britain from his home in the USA. Through his book, Flying Saucers have landed, co-written with Desmond Leslie, Adamski had gained world attention with his claims to have been contacted by visitors from outer space. Now he was in Edinburgh to repeat his claims. The year before, in February 1958, the city had been visited by another famous ‘contactee’, George King the founder of the Aetherius Society. King claimed that he had been given various secrets by alien visitors and repeated his claims at no less a venue than Edinburgh’s Usher Hall. The Scotsman reported the event under the less than serious heading: INTER PLANETARY PARLIAMENT. THE VOICE ELECT SPEAKS OUT AT THE USHER HALL. Interest in UFOs reached such a pitch during this period that, on 17 January 1966, according to the Edinburgh Evening News, ‘the first Scottish group of Sky Scouts’ was set up at a meeting in Leith town hall. They had plenty to keep them busy. However, many years were to pass before Scotland was presented with its first publicised abduction case and clear evidence of an alien visitation.

On 17 August 1992, Gary Wood and Colin Wright set off from Edinburgh to go to a friend’s house in the village of Tarbrax, fifteen miles outside the city. As Gary explained, ‘The receiver on my satellite dish blew and I rang my friend Ian Phillips to see if he could help.’ Gary’s visit was not planned far in advance and as he was getting ready to go his pal Colin Wright turned up and decided to accompany Gary. It’s interesting to speculate what might have happened had Gary left alone. It was around 10 p.m. that the pair set off judging that the journey should take no more than thirty minutes. The road they took was the A70 which, once it passes the villages of Currie and Balerno, enters an expanse of bleak moorland that stretches all the way along the lower slopes of the Pentland Hills to Carnwath. The small community of Tarbrax where Gary and Colin were heading lies off the main road at an isolated spot. As they drove towards Harperrig Reservoir, about five miles from Balerno, the car approached a blind bend. Colin Wright suddenly called out, ‘What the hell is that?’

Looking skywards Gary caught sight of a large object hovering about twenty feet above the road. He later remembered it as being roughly thirty-five to forty feet across, black or darkcoloured and resembling a classic ‘flying saucer’ shape. It was windowless and looked as if it was made of metal of some kind.

Unnerved by the strange object Gary immediately hit the accelerator, aiming to drive underneath it and pull away as quickly as possible. As the car passed beneath it they were plunged into what Gary described as ‘a void of blackness.’ He also recalled a ‘shimmering curtain’ resembling the picture on an un-tuned television set descending around them and covering exactly the width of the road. In the darkness they felt something hit the back of the car. As Gary explained, ‘And then I wasn’t in the car. I was thinking, “Where’s the car?” “Where’s Colin?” I could see only blackness and really thought I was dead. Then I was back in the car on the wrong side of the road with Colin screaming, “Did you see it?”’ The object had disappeared and all they could make out was a starry sky.

Gary didn’t hang around to investigate and drove rapidly, at speeds approaching 90mph according to Gary, to Tarbrax, where they found the house they were heading for in darkness. This was surprising as they knew their friends were expecting them. They had already experienced a strange journey, but now events were to enter the realm of the bizarre. They eventually roused their friends who had gone to bed. They had turned in because Gary and Colin had arrived at 12.45 a.m., nearly three hours after they had set out. A trip which should had taken no more than forty-five minutes had lasted almost four times as long. Both Gary and Colin were deeply puzzled. It seemed inexplicable. They had been together on a shared journey, but neither could find an answer to the puzzle.

Gary, however, soon started experiencing unpleasant symptoms including headaches and bouts of nervousness. He reasoned that there must be some connection with the events on the A70 on 17 August. But his mind could not come up with any direct link.

The mystery of what took place only came out when Gary underwent regression hypnosis; a practice intended to pull out from an individual’s memory facts which are not recoverable by the everyday conscious mind and have, perhaps, been suppressed or hidden. A truly enigmatic story was revealed. Gary and Colin had been abducted from the car by alien entities. They had been taken on board a craft of some kind by grey-coloured creatures which Gary described as having ‘a translucent bone-shaped arm with long fingers.’ Gary was kept on a hospital-like bed. From this spot he observed various incidents. In a hole in the floor of the craft, filled with some sort of sticky fluid, he saw ‘a head appear out of it with a body and two arms.’ He added, ‘the creature must have been pretty big, bigger than me. It was like a skeleton with flesh around it. It had long arms, really long arms. It had a long body, really skinny, with the skin tight.’ The entity had a large head with two prominent eyes, not of the human type, which were very dark. The flesh on its body appeared discoloured. It’s interesting that in Gary’s recall of these events the beings attempted and succeeded in communication with him not through speech, but by telepathy.

For weeks after, Gary suffered nightmares. One morning he found himself nearly a mile from his house, half dressed and dazed. Puzzled and worried, he tried to make sense of his encounter and why time was missing from his life. It was at this point that he decided to undergo hypnotic regression. Gary Wood described to me when I interviewed him in the 1990s the hidden memories that resurfaced:



I felt I was in my car and it was like being electrocuted, as if my muscles were being pulled in on me. I saw three wee men coming towards the car. Then there was a taller entity, six to seven feet, translucent like a grey-white colour. It came close to me and said, ‘I’ve got a life like yours, but different.’ What it was trying to tell me was, ‘look I’m not a monster.’ There was also a brown-coloured being with a heart-shaped head and folds of skin about four feet high. It looked ancient.



From Gary’s remembered account the entities also put him through a medical examination of some kind.



I saw two objects go away from my chest. At the same time the entities were looking at my left leg. I couldn’t move at all during this time. There was an object right inside my ear making a humming noise.



One of the odd aspects of the incident was that Gary had no sight of Colin during these events although, given the experience related by other abductees, it would seem likely that they were separated and looked at in isolation. Gary, however, did see one other person. He described, ‘a naked female on the ground, in her early twenties with blonde hair. She was trying to cover herself up. She was very distressed. Her eyes were red with crying.’

It’s possible that the incident on the A70 was not Gary’s first encounter as he had experienced a strange incident as a child. ‘I went missing for most of the day when I was just four years old and where I was during all that time has never been explained. I just have vague memories of playing with children in strange-coloured sand.’

Interestingly, a month after the A70 incident, a witness, David, reported a sighting, on the other side of the Pentland Hills, directly opposite, as the crow flies, the spot where Gary and Colin experienced their encounter. On 19 September 1992, at 9 p.m., he was driving along an unclassified road towards Penicuik when he caught sight of a bright blue pulsating light moving low down over the Pentland Hills. It was travelling rapidly and David felt straightaway that it had glimpsed his car lights and was heading directly for him. Nevertheless, he stopped and got out of the car to get a better look. He was surprised to note that although he had not been aware of the light descending it had come down and now sat low over the moor. It wasn’t clear to David just what the blue light could represent or what was going on, so after watching for a short time, and with no one else around, he decided to get away. But curiosity overcame him and he stopped by a cottage at a crossroads and looked back to where he had encountered the UFO. It could still be seen flashing quite clearly. The following day he returned to the scene to find out if he could explain the events, but there was no obvious answer and it remains a puzzle … but one in keeping with so many incidents reported from across the Pentlands.

The A70 abduction attracted considerable attention and, in Autumn 2009, there were claims in the press that the events were going to be turned into a film. Because of the use of hypnosis in extracting the memories of the witnesses it is certainly a controversial case. But against that the sheer volume of sightings in the Edinburgh area has to be considered. If these do represent an alien presence then the encounter experienced by Gary and Colin falls neatly into place.

And given the many witnesses to UFOs in the skies over the capital, can anyone seriously doubt that alien activity is a possible cause? At around 3.50 p.m. on Wednesday, 20 November 2002, several civil servants working on the fourth floor of the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries block in West Edinburgh saw a group of small objects moving rapidly and erratically over Arthur’s Seat. The UFOs were observed for around twenty minutes until an aircraft, heading to land at the airport, appeared in view. At this point the UFOs shot upwards at high speed and disappeared.

At 8.20 a.m. on 30 November 1992, Mrs Lenzie was walking along the promenade with a friend beside Portobello beach when they spotted a strange object in the sky. It was rectangular in shape with four porthole-shaped windows with glowing lights visible. They watched it for a couple of minutes as it moved in the direction of Edinburgh. Could it have been a plane? As is often the case the witnesses had seen aircraft flying over many times and were convinced that this was something different.

At 4.30 p.m. on 16 December 1992, John, from his house in Leith, caught sight of a large bright object in the sky with lights suspended below it. He watched the object through binoculars for several minutes as it appeared to hover in the sky and did not move. It was then obscured by a cloud. The witness was adamant that this was not a star or planet. It’s difficult to be sure given the restricted nature of the sighting. However, in one of those strange coincidences at exactly the same time and date, 4.30 p.m., Wednesday 16 December 1992, a witness in Balerno observed a blue light, which he described as ‘electric’ travelling over Balerno towards the Pentlands. Was there any connection between these two events, or was it simply pure coincidence?

On 22 May 1996, Peter saw a large white object which he described as ‘misty-looking’ and having a long protruding tail moving over Peffermill Road. The sightings took place at around 10.15 p.m. on what was a clear evening. The top of the tail was red and the underside orange. The object, though not very high above ground, travelled slowly across the sky for about a minute till it was obscured by a house and disappeared.

In December 1994, a woman driving near Prestonpans saw, in her rear-view mirror, a green ball of light travelling down the road behind her. It shot over the roof of the car at about the height of a house and accelerated into the sky. The lady was so surprised by this incident that she reported it to Air Traffic Control at Edinburgh airport. In response, they sent out what she described as ‘an official looking form’ to fill in; evidence that someone somewhere was taking these reports seriously.

In one case, a female witness was convinced that she had observed the same UFO on two separate occasions within a three-week period. The first sighting took place on Wednesday, 17 January 1996. The witness was waiting for a bus in Balgreen Road at around 5.30 p.m. when she saw what she described as ‘a bright object’ in the west. It hovered there for almost twenty-five minutes and appeared to be getting brighter as she watched. Then on Sunday, 4 February 1996, at 6 p.m., she was looking out of the window of her house in St Leonard’s Street when she caught sight of the object again. On this occasion her partner was with her and was able to observe the object too. The suggestion that this might have been a planet or bright celestial body is contradicted by the fact that the male witness could make out four lights which appeared to be in a line. Two larger lights were on the outside and two smaller lights on the inside. As they watched the UFO, a plane took off which crossed beneath it, temporarily obscuring their view. After twenty minutes they ended their observation, but when they returned some time later the UFO had gone.

On Tuesday, 3 March 1997, Elaine was walking through the playground of Hopefield primary school in Bonnyrigg when her three-year-old daughter suddenly drew her attention to a strange object in the sky. Elaine looked up and was astonished to see what she called ‘a big bright orange ball of flame’ in the sky. It was trailing a plume of smoke behind it. The UFO stopped and appeared to hover. The event was dramatic enough to lead Elaine to go into the school to alert them to the situation, but when she came out the object had gone. Investigation afterwards led Edinburgh airport and the RAF to confirm that it was not one of their craft. So what on earth could it have been?

With the arrival of the twenty-first century, sightings of unexplained objects have continued with no apparent signs of slowing down. In February 2000, a ‘bright oval object’ was reported travelling at speed over Colinton and bizarre ‘dancing lights’ were seen over Leith in March 2001. Several years later, in December 2008, another witness in Leith glimpsed a pulsating orange light moving silently over the city. When, in 2007, the Ministry of Defence issued its collection of UFO incidents for the area many similar incidents were listed, which at least proves that even the authorities are willing to admit that strange events are taking place in the skies over Edinburgh.

Witnesses to UFO incidents generally have only one encounter in a lifetime. But some people have several sightings and are known as ‘repeater’ witnesses. It’s not clear why an individual should have more than one experience, but it may be that whatever UFOs are, they are active in the area where the repeater witness lives. Or, maybe the witness has some psychic awareness that allows them to see UFOs in a way that others can’t. On 8 August 1996, Andrew McMichael woke up at 2.15 a.m. A fox had been coming into the garden and he was curious to see if it had eaten the food he’d left out for it. The plate had been licked clean, but as Andrew looked up he glimpsed something completely unexpected. He was, he told me:



just in time to see an object move in an undulating path across the trees and houses at the edge of Frogston Road to the south of my house. It was completely silent and had a slight round bright red emission at the centre.



The UFO was oval in shape with a red dome. He estimated its size as around thirty feet long and fifteen feet from top to bottom. The object moved away in ‘a slightly wavy pattern’ then ‘rose up as if to clear a clump of trees.’ To Andrew it seemed to change direction twice, as though searching for something, before disappearing behind some sycamores bordering farmland.

This had been Andrew’s second sighting of a strange object within a week. Andrew confirmed that on 2 August both he and his wife were woken in the early hours of the morning, at 3.15 a.m., by a dazzling white light. They both went to the window where they were almost blinded by an intense white light which was so powerful that they were unable to see outside the bedroom window. The light moved off silently in a westerly direction. Later, in conversation with neighbours, it emerged that others had witnessed this strange light and the sensation of an electrically charged atmosphere which Andrew had also felt in his bedroom at the time. However, his neighbours’ sightings had taken place forty minutes after Andrew’s which suggested that the UFO had been moving around the area for some time.

Some months later Andrew had further strange experiences which, on the surface, don’t appear to make any sense, but could well have been related to these earlier events. On 23 December a large snowflake-shaped object, appeared on the bedroom window covering it completely. The following week a red swirling crimson dust appeared at the window blocking out the sky. When it eventually moved away the heavens appeared again.

Andrew’s experiences, however, began twenty years before. In the late summer of 1976, at around 5.30 p.m., Andrew caught sight of what he took to be an aeroplane banking over Clermiston Hill. The ‘plane’ seemed to be moving in an odd way and Andrew caught his breath as it appeared as if it was going to hit a clump of trees on the hillside. Just as disaster seemed unavoidable the object flipped on to its edge to reveal a disc shape with a raised central area. The UFO was very large. According to Andrew, ‘300 feet across with a very elliptical profile and coloured blue and white.’ Was this an attempt to camouflage itself against the background of the sky? The way it moved was also noticeably odd. ‘Instead of moving as an aeroplane would, edge on to the airflow, the large disc moved upright, slowly at first, stopped, then just looked as if it switched off … or disappeared completely.’ The area where Andrew had his sighting seems to be one which attracts strange events. Corstorphine Hill, close by, was the scene of a UFO incident as far back as 1958, when James Black of Balgreen Road observed a long silver-coloured object streaking across the evening sky above the hill.

It’s significant to note that Edinburgh appears to be at the epicentre of a UFO triangle, which stretches from West Lothian across the city to East Lothian and up to Fife. In 1999, unexplained lights were seen over North Berwick Law. A search of the area revealed a strange piece of cloth hidden at the back of a run-down stone hut. This followed a report that a peculiar shard of metal had fallen from the sky and landed beside a walker on Traprain Law. Neither event proves that entities from outer space are visiting the area, and scientists who examined the cloth were dismissive of extraterrestrial origins though not everyone agrees with that verdict. But the odd lights reported were certainly in tune with similar sightings recorded over several decades by a variety of witnesses, and also tallied with the experience of abductees. Though it focused attention on alien encounters, the A70 abduction perhaps obscured several other cases where witnesses encountered beings who claim to have originated in distant worlds. On 16 February 1980, a man in his late thirties, living in Muirhouse, was woken by a disturbance. Going to the window he observed an object hovering between the block of flats where he lived and the adjacent building. It seems that either the UFO spotted him or had, for whatever reason, deliberately set out to attract his attention, for in the next moment he was struck by a beam of light. The light, coming from the UFO, froze his body and he found himself unable to move. At the same time he was aware of a strange smell which reminded him of sulphur. Immediately, he became aware of an entity which, he believed, spoke to him by telepathy. What it said is typical of the sort of message reported by those who claim to have encountered alien entities who then communicate with them, but with a twist. It warned John that the Earth was in danger, but that they would not allow the Earth to be harmed. They would take action to deal with those destroying it. The reason why they were interested in the planet’s future came from the fact, they claimed, that they had once lived here. Having delivered the message they disappeared and John found that he could move again. But why they had appeared in this way and given such a message to an individual member of the public is hard to explain.

In the same year as the Muirhouse event, twenty-two-year-old Andrew Hennessey went through an abduction experience, taken from his home in the suburb of Portobello. As Andrew described it:



In April 1980, in my bedroom, I was looking at the bookcase when I saw tiny green balls bouncing slowly over my books. I turned over in my bed and hoped they would go away. A while later, I looked back, but they were still there. I saw above the coffee table a hovering silver ball. It moved over to the foot of the bed and I heard a voice saying, ‘Don’t be afraid.’



When Andrew woke up the following day he found that he was so tightly tucked up in bed that he could not have done it himself. So what had happened? It was also 2 p.m., long past his usual waking time. So what had made him sleep on? He had vague memories of spending time with some grey-coloured aliens. It may seem a bit hazy, but these half-recalled recollections are typical of encounters of this kind, as Ed would testify.

Starting in August 1990, Ed went through several experiences with alien beings that he believed may have abducted him from his Morningside home. He described his experiences as ‘memories,’ but ones that clearly disturbed him. The incidents took place at the same time each morning, always between 12 a.m. and 3.30 a.m. On each occasion Ed felt both ‘paralysed’ and ‘frightened.’ Ed recalled lying on a bed of some kind surrounded by beings who appeared human-like, but with greyish coloured skin with a pinkish tinge. They were small, around five feet tall, and thin, with slow, lumbering movements. These beings wore clothes which looked as if they might be uniforms, an odd feature which is not often reported. But Ed could not recall any particular facial features so it is possible that the beings were wearing face coverings of some kind which obscured their heads. Ed did not know what to make of these events though he certainly found them unsettling.

As might be guessed, abduction experiences are rare events and often seem like isolated incidents, unrelated to wider UFO activity. Events around Gorebridge, however, run against this general trend. In the last few years, there have been many claimed sightings in the area, several caught on film. It has also been reported that there exists a system of underground tunnels around this location and that grey aliens dressed in uniforms have been observed at the entrance to the cavern network. These alleged sightings might fit with the ability of UFOs to disappear easily as, it has been suggested, they may have bases beneath the earth where they hide during the day. Unlikely though that may seem, many abductees have reported that rather than being lifted up into an orbiting UFO they believe that they were taken, in fact, underground. And Gary Wood, following his abduction on the A70, certainly had that suspicion.

Given the claims of the large amount of alien activity in the area, it may come as no surprise to learn that at least one abduction may have taken place. In 2007, the witness, a woman, was driving on a country road when her car engine and headlights abruptly cut out. She stepped out of the car and immediately became aware of a dark object hovering overhead with a light shining from it. At that moment a car pulled up behind her and a man came over, saying that his engine had suddenly stopped working. He tried to phone for help, but found that his mobile was ‘dead.’ Only then did he appear to catch sight of the object above them. He seemed disturbed by what he was seeing, but the UFO gradually moved away and as it did so both car engines re-started. When the witness arrived at work, as much as twenty minutes could not be accounted for. What had happened during that missing time? Nobody can be sure. This collection of incidents may be controversial, but it undoubtedly fits a general pattern of UFO activity in, around and over the capital, although there may be different interpretations over what was involved. However, there is a real interest across the UK about what is happening here, so much so that, in June 2007, I was interviewed by Jeremy Paxman about UFO activity in Scotland on the Newsnight programme, particularly about whether sightings of back triangular shaped objects could, in fact, be secret military aircraft. It’s certainly possible, but could it really explain all UFO reports?

If alien beings are indeed passing through Edinburgh’s air space, are they also invading people’s homes? And if so what are they up to? One witness appears to have been through an alien encounter of a very strange kind. In January 1989, Stuart was staying on his own in a basement flat in the Newington area. The first odd incident he experienced took place when he heard strange noises coming from the wardrobe. There was nothing obvious to explain it so he dismissed it. Was this a prelude to later events? Stuart had by now moved to new accommodation. One night he returned to his room in the early hours after meeting some friends. As he lay down on the bed a strange atmosphere seemed to envelop the room. He felt as if a heavy presence was hanging over his body as he lay with his eyes closed. The room was in darkness and, in the dark, Stuart could hear the pounding of his heart and fear gripped him. He felt that he could not move properly although he was not paralysed. Summoning up all his strength Stuart threw himself out of bed and flicked on the light. Nothing. The room looked perfectly normal. He clambered back into bed and lay down. Classical music started to play. He could hear it, realising right away that something odd was happening as it was not the sort of music that appealed to him at that time in his life. ‘What the hell is going on?’ he muttered, opening his eyes to gaze at the ceiling.

By now the music had stopped and Stuart allowed his eyes to drift down from the ceiling. It was then that he saw it; a living vortex of energy like a swirling mass. He was fascinated yet repelled by the sight. What was it that forced Stuart to glance in the direction of the window? The curtains weren’t fully drawn and in the gap between he could make out a large almond-shaped eye staring at him. The gaze was one of power, almost as if an invisible beam of energy was being directed at him. He was fascinated by the eye, but at the same time he was not able to hold its gaze. The energy emanating from it forced him to look away. Stuart, however, did not feel that the mysterious watcher was in any way threatening him. All the time that this was going on, Stuart could hear the sound of passing traffic on the road so knew that this was no strange dream. It was real and he was wide awake. Then, suddenly, a disembodied head of the being floated straight through the glass and into the bedroom where it hung suspended in mid-air. Stuart stared in sheer disbelief. It looked like an insect-shaped head with two large, dark eyes.

When Stuart examined the window the following morning he noticed some scratches on the window pane. He judged the distance from the ground to the spot where he had seen the eye and then head appear as around three feet, which suggested that whatever he had seen was well below the usual human height in stature. In fact, what he had seen reminded him of the alien entities encountered in various parts of the world; the small, large-headed greys who most certainly do not have a human-like appearance. But these events raise several questions. Are ‘aliens’ and ‘UFOs’ truly from other far-off planets in galaxies millions of light years away? Or are they beings who may exist in dimensions that border our own and can visit us at will? Whatever their origin, ‘aliens’ seem to be appearing in ever-increasing number, as do sightings of UFOs. Perhaps someday soon the purpose —if there is a purpose — of all this strange activity over Edinburgh, will be revealed to us. That is certainly what some abductees believe.





8


Weird Edinburgh


In the summer of 2001, on a bright afternoon, a couple, Tom and Ellen, were walking along a path above Salisbury Crags on Arthur’s Seat when they experienced a strange encounter. As they strolled they suddenly became aware of two weird-looking figures about a hundred yards away. Both were unusually tall and thin, over seven feet in height with spindle-like arms and legs. They were dressed completely in black. But it was what they did next which led the couple to pause and stare. Suddenly they dropped in unison on all fours and appeared to be sniffing the grass as if looking for something. Tom recalled:



For an instant I thought I’d wandered into a scene someone was creating for a horror film of some sort. It was just so unearthly. Then one of the pair pulled a small object from his pocket and pushed it firmly into the ground. They both stood up turned round and caught sight of us watching them.



Tom and Ellen immediately sensed that their presence was not welcome. In fact the atmosphere turned menacing. Tom said:



If it hadn’t been for the fact that our neighbour couldn’t get out that day and we took his Alsatian for some exercise to help out, I’m not sure what might have happened. The dog started barking and that seemed to disturb the pair so we took the chance to head off smartly. After a few seconds I glanced back, rather nervously I admit, and they had vanished. I couldn’t see them anywhere. That unnerved me too so I was glad to get back to the car.



Of course, there might be an innocent explanation for this bizarre event. But against that is the fact that the description given by Tom and Ellen of the figures they saw hardly fits the bill of normal human beings. And the behaviour they witnessed appears decidedly odd. However, their experience does fit a pattern. Just one more strange, unexplained event, on a hill which has been a focus of strange activity across the centuries. Arthur’s Seat has been the scene of many unsolved mysteries. One in particular has remained a puzzle for almost two hundred years.

In 1836, a strange find was made by schoolboys playing on its slopes. Beneath three pieces of upright slate they discovered a small space dug into the hillside, which had clearly been intended as a secret spot of some kind. What they then pulled out has been the subject of controversy ever since. At some time, exactly when still isn’t clear, someone had placed inside the hole seventeen miniature coffins, which had been arranged neatly in three layers. There were eight on the first and second tiers, but only one on top, suggesting that it had probably been intended to add a few more. The coffins had been expertly made, carved out of wood, with perfectly fitting lids kept in place by brass pins, and from which shone elaborate metal plates, just like the real thing. Each coffin was no more than four inches long. When the coffins were opened the mystery deepened. Inside each box, which was lined with coloured cloth, rested a small figure, fully dressed, wearing funeral clothes with black boots. It was clear that someone had gone to a lot of effort to create a realistic funeral scene. But why? There have been several suggestions. Perhaps the most far-fetched is that the coffins were some kind of child’s toy. It’s true that they were tiny, as youngsters’ toys tend to be, but who would give or make such a thing for a child? And why hide them in such a remote spot?

Furthermore, it was clear that the boxes had been entombed over a long period as the ones at the bottom of the pile were in a much poorer condition than the ones on top. Hiding away the coffins had clearly been a venture which had covered at least several years, if not decades. It had been a purposeful and secret exercise. So could it have been an act of witchcraft? Confessions extracted in the sixteenth century from accused witches include details of magic rituals by which an effigy was given the name of the person who was destined to die. Some object, even just a strand of the victim’s hair, would be attached to the figure and it would then be burnt or destroyed in some way. As the effigy crumbled so the person it represented would fade and die. These figures were, however, normally made from wax and not wood. Nor would they be left for years like the Arthur’s Seat coffins, as the whole point was their destruction not their preservation.

No, I would suggest a far more sinister interpretation. My investigation of Satanist and black magic beliefs has led me to the conclusion that, while the figures were indeed made to represent individuals, it was not intended that these people should die. What the creators were seeking was control of each person’s soul. Practitioners of the dark side of ritual magic believe firmly that, by using the correct ceremonies, a man can gain possession of another’s life essence. If that essence can then be attached to a figure made to represent that person, then the black magician believes that he has control over that man or woman. It is almost like a form of voodoo although it has no such name in Edinburgh. Having created his magic the Satanist would wish to preserve and conceal his figures which, incidentally, would have to be made from a living material such as wood. It does neatly explain what was found and why it was placed there. Of course there are those who will doubt that there was anything strange about these coffins, but that would be to ignore the beliefs of those, whether true or not, that ritual magic can overcome the forces of nature and have a direct effect on individual lives.

Certainly the idea that our lives might be subject to outside forces beyond our influence does concern some people. One of the strangest cases that I investigated was that in which a woman was convinced that she had become subject to a jinx. It seems a disturbing thing to believe, but a series of events occurred in a short space of time which suggested, in spite of scepticism, that something more than simple bad luck was at work. It appears to have started when Lucy rented a house on the north side of the town. Streams of invisible energy run across the city called ley lines and Lucy, who was keenly interested in dowsing, was convinced that these were especially strong in the area around her home. She didn’t realise at first that this energy might have a negative impact, and only became aware of it when her health rapidly went downhill. Doctors seemed unable to help and she was gradually being worn into the ground without being sure exactly why. Searching for answers, she turned to experienced dowsers for help and an attempt was made to divert the energy streams by putting down suitable stones, containing quartz, at particular locations. But, to Lucy’s dismay, these efforts did not bring about any immediate improvement.

To Lucy these events, which some might have put down to simple bad luck, were part of a pattern. For years she had sensed that she was the victim of a jinx of some kind. The feeling gradually came over her, but was intensified by odd events she experienced. One day she was convinced that she had seen the word ‘jinx’ in a car number plate and that this had a special message meant for her. Another time, she came home to find that her front door had been broken down by the police. The story she was told was that there was concern about her health as she hadn’t been seen by the neighbours for several days. Lucy found this hard to understand as, although she often spoke to her neighbours, days could pass by without seeing anyone. It was the second time that her door had been broken down for no clear reason and to Lucy it was inexplicable and part of the jinx. Immediately after this incident, Lucy’s dog fell ill and was given only twenty-four hours to live. It eventually pulled through, but did not make a full recovery.

The jinx continued. Lucy was given a crystal to bring good luck and combat negativity. She put it in an envelope and left it on the sofa intending to find a safe place to keep it. She went into another room to type, but when she came back the crystal had vanished. It hadn’t slipped down the side of the sofa and, according to Lucy, had simply disappeared into thin air. It seemed as if ‘something’ was determined to make Lucy’s life as difficult as possible. There were many similar incidents, a lot more, she believed, than would be encountered in the normal run of life.

Lucy’s experience raises a number of issues. Having dowsed her house when these events were going on I would confirm that there were strong energy streams running through all the rooms. It seems the case that such energy can affect individual health. Certainly the Chinese have believed so for thousands of years, but it’s less clear why this should bring about a run of bad luck, so much so that a person might feel they were jinxed. Could the effect on health produce such a result, make one imagine that one’s luck was worse than it is? Or are there elements in the universe which can play dice with our lives and, like rolling a series of ones when you want to roll a six, throw us a run of never ending bad luck?

Whatever the truth, my view, after years of using dowsing rods and discussion with fellow dowsers, is that energy can have a variety of effects and that nowhere is free of their influence. In 2004, when Heart of Midlothian were using Murrayfield to play home matches and there was talk of their moving there permanently, I offered to dowse both grounds to compare the effects that each would have on the ability of players to compete. I offered my services to the Hearts’ board so that they and the supporters could judge the impact that moving to Murrayfield would have on the success of the team. As well as considering the financial position the board, I thought, should take into account the implication for the well-being of the Hearts’ players in moving location. The Evening News covered my proposal under the heading: PARANORMAL EXPERT TO GET HEARTS ON RIGHT LINES.

My reasons for doing this were clear. An enclosed space like a football ground is criss-crossed by ley lines. You can get streams of negative and positive energy and an enclosed space is affected by the balance between these two forces. These streams of energy can have a physical effect on players, especially as they are taking part in intense activity. Teams are often successful at their home grounds because their bodies learn to attune to these streams of energy. Ideally, before any team considers moving ground, they should take into account the energy flow of the area they are moving to and the impact it may have. The Hearts’ board did not take me up on the offer, but Hearts’ legend Gary McKay was reported in the Evening News as saying that, ‘Anything that’s going to give the team an advantage in the long-term is fine by me.’ Given the competitive nature of the football world, examining the impact of energy lines on your ground, whether it be Tynecastle or Easter Road, is surely worth consideration.

But could invisible tunnels of energy linking our world with who knows what or where explain a whole range of odd events, even the appearance of strange beasts? Phantom cats arouse much controversy. Are they pumas or some other large animal which has escaped from captivity? Or could they be alien creatures who have, by accident, entered the Earth from other dimensions? Or do they even exist? It seems hard to dispute that we are dealing with a genuine phenomenon. There have been too many close-up sightings to doubt it.

In the summer of 1979, a witness near the village of Roslin, where Rosslyn Chapel is located, glimpsed a large animal crossing a path nearby. He got a good view of the beast as, apparently, it was less than six feet from him. At such close range it is hard to believe that, when the witness states that what he saw was a puma, he could have made a mistake. The ‘cat’ was a golden colour like that of a typical Labrador with a black bar running across its face. The beast then leapt over a clump of ferns and raced uphill where it stopped for a moment and looked back allowing the witness another view. From this the witness was convinced that the animal was pregnant. If he was correct it would imply that there was at least one other puma roaming the countryside around Edinburgh.

An animal of a similar colour was seen three years later, in May 1982, by a woman out walking with her husband and children along a disused railway track near Penicuik. Mrs McKinnon described the creature as being around the size of a lion with gold-coloured fur and a long tail. The animal appeared to be preoccupied with prowling a small area of ground, which it did for several minutes while Mrs McKinnon kept it under observation. The beast gave no indication that it was aware of the family watching it from the path below.

This could not have been the same animal seen the following month, June 1982, apparently stalking sheep at a nearby farm, as this animal was described as being ‘dark grey’ in colour with a ‘dark sheen’ across its back. The beast was no smaller than twenty inches in height, with a long body, large ears and a tail measuring around three feet. It appeared to be preparing to attack animals in the field, though it seems it did not make a move at this time. Eventually the beast went away. Police were called and with the help of the SSPCA a search was made of the area, without success. However, a few days later, a monk at a nearby abbey reported seeing a similar animal with a dark body running across fields. Animal experts were convinced that a puma, or a large cat-like beast, was active as they were aware that a sheep had been killed in the area the previous weekend. This, apparently, had been in a manner which suggested that a large animal had been responsible.

The truth is that reports of an unidentified beast have been made by a considerable number of witnesses over the past few decades. The exact dates of some of these are unclear. However, they include a mother and daughter coming across a large puma-like cat sitting in the middle of the road as they drove towards West Linton. The beast stared at the car for a few seconds before jumping a gate and disappearing into the countryside. And a group of walkers glimpsed an animal they believed to be a puma, again in the Pentlands, as they followed the Nine Mile Burn route.

One puzzling aspect is that though incidents keep occurring there are significant time gaps, periods when the beasts simply seem to disappear. There appear to have been fewer sightings, for example, during the 1980s, but then the phantom beast returned in 1997, with a fresh rash of sightings. A puma-like creature was reported by a motorist after she saw it lying at the side of the road. She thought it might be unwell which chimed with a sighting by a second witness at a different location who thought the animal he saw might have an injured leg. Significantly though, there were no reports of sheep being attacked. As significant in my view is the comment from the SSPCA as reported by the Edinburgh Evening News: ‘We’ve had reports of many sightings over the years, but we’ve never been able to confirm them. However, parts of West Lothian are quite desolate — there’s no knowing what’s up there.’ The discovery, however, of large cat-like paw prints, following a report from a woman in Breich that she had seen a puma-like animal, maybe does suggest that we are dealing with a flesh-and-blood creature, though it remains surprisingly elusive.

This was certainly the view of some. In 1997, Brian Wood spent time searching the Bathgate Hills after several sightings of a black, puma-like animal which had been spotted padding through the streets of local towns and villages. Brian had an encounter of his own while walking his dog near Boghall in West Lothian, in April 1997. He heard the noise of leaves rustling and as he turned to look caught sight of a creature which resembled a panther. He described it as around four feet long and three feet in height. It leapt out from a mass of shrubbery then shot past him, before effortlessly jumping a fence at least six feet high.

Perhaps these phantom beasts have been around for a long time and that would explain a series of bizarre attacks on sheep on the west side of the Pentland Hills in the 1930s. However, on this occasion, no one even caught a glimpse of the creature which must have been responsible for the incidents. The idea that a ‘big cat’ was roaming the area would have been dismissed, at that time, as laughable. But the world has moved on and ‘phantom cats’ are certainly being taken more seriously, And if a puma was out there eighty years ago, it would certainly put paid to the explanation that irresponsible owners released such pets into the wild after the passing of the Dangerous Animals Act of 1975, which banned their ownership. These bizarre beasts have undoubtedly been around for much longer, and sightings of these creatures, their very appearance, seems to lie at the edge of reality. Attacks on sheep seem the most obvious sign of their presence, but do these incidents really fit the pattern of ‘big cat’ hunting methods? Not in every case.

In 1995, a sheep was killed in a bizarre manner, not far from Edinburgh airport. The farmer on whose land the sheep died claimed that it had been killed by a fox, but that was disputed by others. The cause of death appeared to be a massive wound around the throat, which looked as if it had been ripped open by powerful jaws. Such an attack seemed beyond the power of a fox, so might it have been the victim of another animal — the mysterious ‘black cat?’ It certainly seemed possible and fitted with sightings of such a creature. However, there were doubts. Why hadn’t the puma removed the carcass, or at least consumed it, rather than just leaving it where it died? And investigators claimed that parts of the sheep had been carefully cored out, almost surgically, as if organs might have been removed deliberately, for preservation or use of some kind. So did the event fit more into those linked to ‘alien mutilation’, as reported from several parts of the USA? The jury is out as the evidence is conflicting, but the incident is undoubtedly a strange one.

If odd events are puzzling, the absence of phenomena can generate equal bemusement. In the 1980s and 1990s, hundreds of crop circles appeared across parts of south-west England. A variety of explanations was given for their arrival. To some they were an attempt by aliens to contact us, or the physical marks of a landed UFO. To others they were a sign from ‘Mother Earth’ herself, that she was angry at the way man was destroying the environment. Some scientists argued that they were being produced by a hitherto little known physical phenomenon, but one which could be explained by rational, scientific measurement. Two individuals claimed to have hoaxed the lot. The full truth of what had happened is still being debated.

So why did crop circles seem to give Scotland a miss? In total it appears that not even two dozen examples have been seen here. I investigated several of them. A few were made close to Edinburgh. One formed in a field by the side of Linlithgow Loch. Another appeared on farmland near to Bonnybridge. There were a couple of examples in East Lothian and the Borders, another near Crieff and the furthest north was in Corpach, close to Fort William. The largest I saw, however, consisting of three concentric rings, was near Limekilns, in Fife. Whilst the formations that appeared in counties like Wiltshire became ever more complex, all the ones in Scotland were little more than a simple circle of flattened crop, or rough grass. The one that formed closest to Edinburgh was beside the airport and was drawn to my attention by a passenger on an inbound flight, though not till several days had passed. Again, it was of a basic circular formation but, unfortunately, the crop was cut down before I had the chance to take any measurements.

The absence of the phenomenon from an area like Edinburgh, with extensive crop-growing land roundabout, is puzzling. Given the volume of UFO sightings you might expect, if there was some connection, that circles would be formed. So why weren’t they? Is there a clue in a similar type of incident? One which appeared in the heart of the city?

Crop circles on your lawn? This phenomenon, rarely reported, was seen and documented by John Morrison. He wrote:



While on a visit to some relatives in Edinburgh on Friday, 13 September 1996, I was told about some unusual circles that had appeared in their garden only days before. The owner, Andrew, had been mowing the lawn several days before my arrival and as he finished the job he noticed several rings on the lawn. The rings seemed to be due to the death of some of the grass as it was yellow/discoloured. He felt that this was very strange as they do not use any type of pesticide or weed killers in their garden. I checked around the garden to see if any tools could have caused the rings but could find nothing capable of creating them. I checked the plant pots around the garden, but they were all too small in diameter to have caused damage to the grass. Only one ring was very well defined all the way round, the others being three-quarters and faintly defined. An unusual feature of the rings was that they were easier to see from a height of about four metres than at ground level.



The immediate issue that springs to mind was whether some object of some kind had landed in Andrew’s garden. According to John’s measurements and the diagram that he drew, the rings formed a triangle with an uppermost one pointing roughly north and the base of the triangle formed by the other two rings, with one slightly higher than the other. The rings were not large. The topmost was 36.5 centimetres across and the two forming the ‘base’ were 36 centimetres and the third of a similar dimension. An added curiosity was that two rings of the same appearance and size had formed slightly to the right of the top circle. It did look as if an object had pressed hard into the lawn and, as it did so, it destroyed the surface. The appearance of these circles was reminiscent of those that had appeared in farmers’ fields. The principal difference, apart from size, was that the area within the circles had been damaged rather than simply flattened. This event then, I would suggest, was more in keeping with accounts that described small UFO-type objects, maybe remotely controlled, landing in people’s gardens, of which there were several reports from around the world. In this instance, no object was seen, but there were certainly many sightings around this time of UFOs across the Edinburgh skies. So does this explain the city’s only ‘crop’ circle? It’s a mystery, but an intriguing one.

At one time, these small circles might have been laid at the door of quite a different being; the ‘nature spirits’ or ‘fairies’. When we think of fairies we have an idea of a small winged creature, delicate and cute. That, however, was not how fairies were traditionally seen in Scotland. They were viewed as a race of people similar to humans, who lived in a netherworld beneath the ground. They possessed fantastic powers including that of invisibility. They often entered people’s homes unannounced, kidnapped the unwary and would generally make a nuisance of themselves, especially if you upset them.

There’s no doubt that Edinburgh has a long tradition of fairy sightings stretching back over several hundred years. In the seventeenth century, Calton Hill was reputed to be a site beneath which could be found a fairy mound. George Burton, who visited Edinburgh in the 1660s, claimed to have spoken to a youth who told him that, every Thursday night, he went inside Calton Hill which he entered by a set of invisible gates. He told Burton that underneath the hill was a suite of rooms in which the fairy folk lived. The lad also claimed to have psychic powers and predicted events yet to be. Burton tried to follow the youth into the hill, but was given the slip. Whilst the account might appear far-fetched it has to be said that it is in keeping with many similar reports from across Scotland at this time. And Calton Hill was only one site where it was said fairies had set up home. Arthur’s Seat contains several such places still known as a ‘fairy knowe’and where that appears on a map you will know that the location was, at one time, seen as a habitation of the fairy people. Times have changed, but fairies have certainly not abandoned the capital. Far from it. In the 1850s, Hugh Miller claimed to have seen fairies in his garden in Portobello. In 1958, Mrs Van Horne reported that a gnome was inhabiting her house in Rothesay Place. He was about a foot tall dressed in red trousers with a brown jacket. Although invisible to most visitors as he sat on the mantelpiece or sideboard, some claimed that they had indeed glimpsed the diminutive being. Mrs Van Horne reported that he had been following her around for years.

But the most extensive sightings of ‘nature spirits’ was made by the mystic R. O. Crombie. Crombie claimed that, while sitting in the Botanic Gardens one sunny afternoon in March 1966, he suddenly became aware of a three foot high figure dancing around a nearby tree. He did a double take as what he saw was something extraordinary. The ‘boy’, as he described him, had ‘shaggy legs and cloven hooves’ and also a ‘pointed chin’ and ‘ears.’ However, perhaps, strangest of all was the two horns projecting from his forehead. The creature’s legs were covered in fine hair and his skin was light brown. Crombie overcame his shock and called out to the entity.

The creature was startled and surprised that Crombie could see him, suggesting either that he believed himself normally invisible or that he inhabited some kind of parallel world in which humans did not normally interact. Events now turned even more weird. The creature got into conversation with Crombie and told him that his name was Kurmos. He agreed to go home with Crombie and the pair walked though the garden gates and along Arboretum Road. Kurmos was invisible to all but Crombie. Back in his flat Crombie and Kurmos talked some more until Kurmos told him it was time for him to return to the Gardens. Crombie opened the door to let him out and Kurmos ran down the steps, his form fading away as he reached the last one.





The Botanic Gardens, Inverleith – more than just an attractive haunt for plant lovers. It is here that the mystic R.O. Crombie encountered and conversed with strange creatures from another dimension.

One might be forgiven for believing that somehow Crombie had experienced a strange waking dream if it wasn’t for the fact that this incident was simply the start of a series of bizarre encounters. Crombie returned to the Botanic Gardens on several subsequent occasions during March and April, and each time, when he called out Kurmos’s name, the faun appeared.

At the end of April events became a little more disturbing. Crombie had been visiting a friend’s house near the Meadows. His journey back home took him along Meadow Walk, over George IV Bridge and down the Mound. Princes Street lay before him. As he reached the National Gallery he felt a strange atmosphere descend on him which made him feel as if he was walking though water. A warm sensation enveloped him and his body tingled. He sensed that ‘something’ was about to happen though he could hardly have expected what appeared. It was a being who told him, ‘I am the Devil,’ and added that if he didn’t believe him to look at his cloven hooves, shaggy legs and the horns on his head. Crombie later wrote that he had ‘a musk-like’ animal smell.

Incredibly, Crombie later denied that he was at all afraid, even when the creature put his arm around him. He did not believe that this entity was the ‘Devil’, but Pan, the god of nature, as written of by the ancient Greeks. The entity, whatever it was, walked with Crombie across Princes Street into George Street. Crombie had managed to convince himself that he was not meeting any evil spirit and told the ‘Devil’ that he believed he was, in reality, Pan. As if by magic, and rather too conveniently, the entity produced a set of pipes and played what Crombie described as a ‘strange tune’, which he could not later remember. As they came to Crombie’s house the entity disappeared. Crombie saw him again on two occasions outside the city. At these the ‘Devil’ appeared surrounded by various entities, including elves, gnomes, and fairies.

So was Crombie experiencing an expedition into another world or, as some have argued, deluding himself? Crombie never doubted that these events were rooted in reality. To him they were as much a part of the real world as taking a bus ride and his visions had a very practical effect. One of the reasons why the world-famous Findhorn Foundation chose its location in the north of Scotland was down to Crombie’s claim that the nature spirits had appeared to him and told him that this was a suitable spot for their enterprise. Crombie was a founder of this influential community, created for those who sought a more spiritual type of life. He certainly believed that happiness could be earned through working with his friends among the nature spirits.

Some believed that, in fact, Crombie had drifted into another dimension; a kind of ‘out of the body’ experience or ‘OBE’. Since the 1960s, the world has became more aware of OBEs and they are now a widely reported phenomenon. It’s interesting to note, however, that as far back as the 1930s instances were being documented in the city. In May 1933, the Evening Dispatch reported the case of a woman from Newington who, ‘when she was very ill had the unusual sensation of feeling that she was outside of her body, of standing looking down on it as it lay on the bed.’ She explained that she saw ‘her sister standing with the doctor looking down on her body.’ She heard him say that he would give her an injection, following which he indicated that they had better leave the room for a short time ‘as the patient must be kept very quiet.’

There is an aspect to this incident which we don’t usually find in OBE cases as the woman added, ‘they left the room and I went with them.’ She had left ‘her body behind on the bed, and she listened to what they said in the next room.’ This suggests that the incident lasted for several minutes and that is not typical of events of this nature. Unfortunately, there is no indication of when the experience ended or whether the woman involved attempted to confirm with her sister and the doctor if, what she heard, was what they had actually said. In fact most OBE cases are connected with near-death experiences and, though the lady in Newington was unwell, she was by no means in a critical state. Her experience, however, suggests that the spirit can leave the body and, when it does, still has the ability to think and understand. All of which may have played a part in R. O. Crombie’s encounters. But if the soul is a separate part of us and can leave the body does that explain reincarnation?

The belief in reincarnation, the idea that each of us is born again and again, is usually linked to the mystic religions of the Far East, and both Hinduism and Buddhism immediately spring to mind. But, in fact, the view that we return many times to Earth to live new lives has a long tradition in Scotland with Edinburgh, as befits a capital city, playing a leading role. It was a key part of the Druid religion, the pagan sect which influenced many pre-Christian beliefs and whose views are still held by some today. In fact, reincarnation has re-emerged in recent years with many Edinburgh citizens claiming that they have ‘lived before.’ You can even join reunion groups in the city where members discuss each others’ past lives, not necessarily lived on this world. Edinburgh mystic Ray Tod was convinced that he had lived before as an Egyptian priest and could list the names of those he had met during his previous years on Earth. He had a vivid memory of his life in Ancient Egypt. Incidentally, the reincarnated soul can return as either a man or woman and Theresa, a shop assistant, told me of her time as a Roman Soldier, and of having been speared and killed on a battlefield.

But being reborn may not be a straightforward task as Thomas explained.



I remember making a particular decision to choose this life. I was given a choice of fourteen or fifteen types of life in Western Europe. I was shown the potential for development in each family, of the way in which I would develop in each different set of circumstances. I remember lying in my cot at the age of two looking at a lake scene and the water started shaking. My spirit guide appeared and asked me if I was sure I wanted to do it this way. I was having very involved conversations at the age of two! Just before I chose my life I remember that I was drinking from a cup. However, I can’t actually remember being born.



Thomas, however, chose a life in twentieth-century Edinburgh on that occasion.

Memories of past lives seem, for most people, to be hidden and only emerge under certain circumstances. In 2004, a Swedish man, Jesper Bood, claimed that he had lived a previous life as a boy in the East Lothian town of Dunbar in the 1850s. Mr Bood had been regressed hypnotically for a programme about reincarnation, made by the Swedish company Strix Television AB. Recalling memories under hypnosis, Mr Bood, who had never visited Scotland, remembered that he had been born as John Smith in Dunbar in 1852. His father had been a blacksmith, also called John, and his mother’s name was Mary Craig. He himself later became a fisherman, marrying a local woman called Betsy.

Astonishingly, investigation of these claims turned up facts which appeared to show that these memories were by no means fanciful. The name he had given for his parents did exist and the records revealed that a thirty-year-old John Smith had married a woman called Elizabeth which often, in those days, became ‘Betsy’. The family’s home was in a location known as Gateside where a forge did once exist, which fitted with the memory of a father who had been a blacksmith. Mr Bood recalled a wealth of detail, talking of a thirty-minute walk to school and giving a description of Dunbar Parish Church. He said that the church, which he could see from the school window, sat close to the sea, as it does. Local experts were also able to recognise Woodburn School, demolished in the 1950s, from Mr Bood’s account, and the fisherman’s tavern, still standing, which he said he had visited on many occasions in this past life.

However, the most detailed case, which many believe provides powerful evidence in support of reincarnation, is that of Ada Kay. Ada was born in Lancashire in the 1920s, but the events that were to trigger a life-long obsession with Edinburgh did not start till she was eighteen years old, when she joined the ATS and was posted to the capital to be stationed eventually near Fairmilehead. Crossing the Scottish border she was swept by a wave of patriotism and experienced the sensation that she was at last ‘coming home.’ This feeling had a more profound implication than she could maybe have guessed at the time. Visiting the ancient regalia of the Scottish crown in Edinburgh Castle, she had a vision of bright red blood trickling down the royal sword as it rested in its display case. Further visions followed during the succeeding days. She kept seeing Edinburgh as it had been hundreds of years ago in the sixteenth century. In these visions the streets and buildings of modern Edinburgh vanished and in their place were forests, lochs, hunting grounds, wild beasts and acres of free land. Ada started walking obsessively up and down the Royal Mile, fascinated by the medieval aspects of the ‘Old Town’. She sensed that it had a deeper meaning for her, but what could that be?

One evening passing through the Lawnmarket, Ada spotted an open door dimly lit by candlelight. Something in her head told her that she was expected to go in as there were people waiting to meet her. Just then a man appeared who bowed to her and ushered her inside. At that instant everything disappeared and Ada found herself standing in the street. When she tried to locate the door the next day it was simply nowhere to be found, but the visions continued. This time she ‘saw’ lines of old-fashioned ships cruising up and down the Forth. Ada was now convinced that she was experiencing visions of past events without understanding why it was happening. Having decided to quit the army she took the train down south, but as she crossed the border she had another strange experience. As she sat in the railway carriage, Ada saw a reflection of herself in the window, but it was not really her. It was the image of someone with a very different, masculine face. Above his head Ada could see a circle of gold, studded with blue stones which sparkled in a halo of light.

Several years passed before Ada manged to make sense of it all; time during which she became a successful playwright and a BBC script writer. In 1959 she returned to Edinburgh and set out to learn more about Scotland’s history. She was stunned on seeing a portrait of James IV to realise that he was the person she had seen in the reflection of the train window. He also had red hair just as she did. Ada became aware that thinking of the Battle of Flodden, at which James had been killed in September 1513, sent shivers coursing through her body. She sensed her identification with King James growing ever more intense and, in 1966, wrote a play about his life, which seemed to flow easily from what she now believed to be genuine memories of having been James in a past life. In August 1967, while visiting Jedburgh, Ada, or A. J. Stewart as she was now known following her marriage, experienced a traumatic memory of ‘her’ death at the Battle of Flodden. She saw clearly the swords as they cut into her body and snatched her life away. To Ada this horrific experience was the final proof that the death she had suffered was real and that everything she had experienced only made sense if reincarnation was a fact. In 1970, she published Falcon. The Autobiography of His Grace James the fourth of Scotland, described as ‘Presented by A. J. Stewart’. It was an account of her former life as the king. This was followed, in 1978, by Died 1513 – Born 1929 the autobiography of A. J. Stewart. There will be those, of course, who will wonder if it was all in Ada Kay’s imagination. But Ada, or A. J. Stewart, was an intelligent woman who considered carefully the incidents she had been through and, only after long consideration, did she decide that for her there could be no other explanation. At one time she had been King James IV, reborn in the twentieth century as Ada Kay.

Ada Kay did not claim it, but there’s maybe another strange phenomenon that reincarnation explains; that of premonition. A ‘premonition’ a warning that something awful is going to happen has been frequently reported. One incident was recorded as far back as July 1860, when a woman in Portobello was warned by a spirit voice that her daughter, Emma, was going to be involved in an accident. The woman herself related the story:



I had told my Emma that I would let her go out to play from three till four and as she was alone I suggested that she go to the ‘railway garden’, a strip of land between the sea and the railway. A few minutes after she left, I distinctly heard a voice saying to me, ‘Send for her at once or something terrible will happen.’ I ignored it, but a few minutes later the same voice began to say the same words to me, but more forcibly. I still resisted and used all my imagination to divine what could happen to the child. I thought about an encounter with a mad dog, but dismissed it as absurd, although I was now beginning to feel anxious. I still resisted doing anything, but soon the voice repeated the warning. ‘Send for her immediately or something terrible will happen.’ At the same time I was gripped with violent trembling and extreme terror. I got up quickly, rang the bell and told the servant to go for my daughter, repeating the voices’ words, ‘or something terrible will happen’.



The servant went out and found her daughter. Shortly after, a train went off the railway line, crashing into the wall and then the strip of land where the daughter used to play. Three men were killed outright and several injured. There’s no doubt that had little Emma not been brought home she would have been among the dead as the engine had hit the very area of rock that she liked to sit on. So had the woman been reliving an episode of life that she had been through before? Could it have been a ‘guardian angel’ calling from the spirit domain? In the world of the supernatural nothing is ever clear-cut.

There’s another strange tale about premonitions with a decidedly odd twist, which was recorded in the summer of 1844. William, whose father owned a large house in Edinburgh, was a twelve year old who the family believed had the power of ‘second sight.’ He reported having ‘visions’ some of which appeared to be very distressing. One evening, according to the report of the time, ‘when the family was all together they had suddenly seen William turn pale and become motionless.’ At the same time, they heard a voice, which appeared to come from William himself, saying, ‘I see a child asleep lying in a velvet box with a sheet of white satin and wreaths and flowers all around. Why are my parents weeping?’ William’s parents were understandably shocked and woke William who, coming to his senses, treated the whole episode as a bit of a joke and ran off to play. A week later the family was sitting outside having had lunch. They noticed that William was not with them and, being unable to find him, a full search of the grounds of the house was set in motion. Eventually, William was found in a small loch. He had, it seemed, been trying to get into a boat moored there, slipped, fallen into the water and drowned. It appears that, bizarrely, twelve-year-old William had predicted his own death correctly.

William, unfortunately, never had the chance to grow up, never had the opportunity, as a man of his background might, to join the clubs which were such a part of Edinburgh life during this era, although even by the time of the lad’s death these societies were becoming more cautious about their behaviour. That hadn’t always been the case.

Some two hundred years ago, Edinburgh was witness to a bizarre phenomenon; the growth of several private clubs whose members engaged in weird practices and rites. They adopted strange names including the ‘Sulphur Club’, the ‘Horn Club’ and the ‘Demi-reps’. Membership was exclusive and only select people were allowed to join, but what they lacked in numbers they made up for in the scandal they created. It was rumoured that, at their weekly meetings, they mocked the Bible and Christian beliefs, preferring strange ceremonies they had devised themselves. More scurrilous were claims that, though women were not officially permitted to join, some were allowed in so that members could take part in group sex and other orgiastic rites. We know from investigation of the ‘Beggar Bennison’ club, which originated in St Andrews but claimed support from Edinburgh, that its members wore ceremonial robes and worshipped a bizarre historical relic, a wig made from the pubic hair of Charles II’s mistresses. Even stranger was their practice of measuring the length of each others’ penises on a special plate while a woman, her face covered by a cloth, lounged naked in a broad armchair. But what, above all, concerned some was that leading men of the city were said to be involved, including judges, MPs and town councillors. It seemed as if the degrading activities engaged in by these clubs could corrupt the whole city.

With hindsight it appears that people were getting worked up over very little. The clubs have long gone and maybe their influence on Edinburgh society was exaggerated. And one might be inclined to think that if it hadn’t been for events involving the infamous Hell Fire Club whose reputation for debauchery sparked a succession of shock waves which reverbate to the present day. Its activities were considered so bizarre that it was seen as outrageous in a very lax period of history as far as morals were concerned. It also had some of the most influential people in the land as its members. The club was probably founded in London by Sir Francis Dasherwood, in the 1760s, and the exact link between the London and Edinburgh branches is not clear. But in terms of activity they were certainly on the same wavelength. Down south the Hell Fire Club engaged in every kind of perverse activity including incest. Sexual orgies were held, with ‘temples’ set up secretly inside churches to carry out late-night weird religious rites. Naked women were laid out on altars on which inverted crosses were placed, while ‘priests’ carried out the club’s secret ritual. Hell Fire members were fascinated by fire and may well have practised the ancient rite of fire worship. Indeed, it was claimed that several fires in Edinburgh were started by the club as part of their ritual activities. This certainly happened in England, where Hell Fire members were prosecuted for fire-raising, and in Glasgow, where the club burned down the Tron Kirk. However, no one in Edinburgh, despite suspicion, was charged and some believed that that was down to powerful friends among the judiciary.

And that may well be true for, in spite of the bizarre activities of the club, it boasted many prominent individuals among its members. They included several well-known Scots, even the Earl of Bute who became Prime Minister in 1762, the first Scot to hold the office after the Act of Union. He appointed the Hell Fire Club founder, Francis Dasherwood, as his Chancellor of the Exchequer. Oddly, though the names of those who were active in the Edinburgh Hell Fire Club are largely unknown, as is the case in Glasgow. Arranging a ‘cover-up’ has long been an option for those in authority and is by no means an invention of the twenty-first century.

But perhaps the most bizarre club of all did not appear till the last years of the nineteenth century. The Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn was set up in the 1890s and included among its members the notorious Satanist Aleister Crowley, dubbed the ‘Great Beast’, a practitioner of black magic who, since his death in 1947, has become an iconic figure for followers of the ‘dark side’ of witchcraft. On the other hand, the poet William Butler Yeats also joined and, as is often the case in magical orders, it included both the innocent and determinedly evil. The Edinburgh branch of the order was set up by the mystic John Brodie-Innes, who established the Amen-Ra temple. Innes and his fellow members took ritual magic seriously and when a dispute broke out between the Edinburgh and London branches of the Golden Dawn the air was electric with psychic battles fought in the ether, and magic spells cast to do down the opposition. Crowley, however, proved too strong and Innes abandoned the Amen-Ra temple though he set up other magic groups, which continued into the 1920s. There are still followers of the magic rites he created active in Edinburgh today, though they prefer to work away from the limelight. According to these adepts, they were responsible for a historic event — it was their magic which brought about the return of the mystical ‘Stone of Scone’ to Scotland.

Within the ancient walls of Edinburgh Castle you can visit one of the nation’s most treasured possessions. The famous Stone of Destiny, the ‘throne’ on which centuries of Scottish kings were crowned, was returned to the capital in 1997, after it had been held in London for several hundred years. There is a long tradition that the Stone of Destiny was the same rock which, in Biblical legend, Jacob used one night as a pillow. As he slept he dreamt of a ladder which reached from Earth to Heaven, and he heard God’s voice calling him. In modern times, this tradition has been interpreted in different ways. To some Jacob was in touch with beings from another world. To others he was making contact with spirit entities. But it is widely agreed that the rock must have acted as a mystical key of some kind.

Legend has it that the Stone of Destiny came to Scotland by way of Egypt and Ireland. It has a reputation as an object possessing great paranormal powers. Some say it still has, and point to the fact that within three years of the stone’s return to Scotland a parliament, the first for three hundred years, was set up. In fact, the parliament’s first meeting was held a short distance from where the Stone now sits. When Edward I took the Stone away with him in 1296, did he somehow weaken the soul of Scotland? Did that soul return with the arrival of the Stone in Edinburgh, or was it simply coincidence? Of course, you’d have to believe that such a thing as a country has a soul. And maybe the whole idea appears far-fetched, but, like so many events involving the paranormal, it has to be admitted that it was a very curious coincidence indeed.

So why is Edinburgh a city of such weird and wonderful events? One thing that can surely be agreed is that the catalogue of strange incidents recounted in Edinburgh After Dark cannot be simply put down to over-active imaginations or collective hallucination. The variety of events experienced undoubtedly show that whatever the cause, ‘something odd’ is connected to the land on which the city stands. Those who wish to disbelieve will, of course, never be convinced till a ghost is ‘captured’ in a science laboratory or an alien being appears in Princes Street gardens. However, those with an open mind should at the very least have been given food for thought. Is the world truly limited to the everyday reality we experience as we go about our lives? Or are there beings, friendly and not so friendly, inhabiting unknown dimensions who from time to time enter by choice or design the world we call our own? The evidence suggests that whatever sceptics may think, we are truly not alone. It may be the case that Edinburgh is located in an area which acts as a window into other worlds and the city has become a playground of the bizarre as a result. Whatever the truth it seems that the capital and the supernatural have been, and will continue to be, closely and inescapably entwined.







Chapter 1




Jesus, thought the angel, looking around the crammed, foetid dungeon. This really was hell. Why did people do this to themselves, he wondered, knowing they would end up somewhere like this? What was it that drove humanity to such folly, that they would fall so far? Then again, he supposed, the tickets had been pretty cheap.

The angel who went by the name of Cain took a long slug of lukewarm lager, staring at his plastic glass with undisguised resentment. In the olden days – which, to a creature of Cain’s lifespan, didn’t actually feel like that long ago – humans had swarmed to amphitheatres to watch their fellow creatures tear one another to pieces, to cheer as those whose only crime was to worship a different god were torn apart by beasts. He supposed, in the grand scheme of things, that paying a tenner to watch something called fringe theatre in a cramped hole that smelled slightly of vomit and under-performing deodorant was progress of sorts, but right now it didn’t seem like it. At least at the amphitheatres you’d been able to get a decent drink.

In fairness, Cain also had to admit that this wasn’t, strictly speaking, a dungeon, either, and he was in a position to know, having seen more than enough dungeons in his time to make a fair comparison. Edinburgh was a city blessed with an abundance of vaults and cellars, and this one had presumably once served as a storage space of some sort, which accounted for the fact it clearly wasn’t designed for habitation, so managed to be both stiflingly hot and dank at the same time; he could see condensation clinging to the stone walls, and he kept his hand over his drink, lest the moisture dripping from the low ceiling watered down a beverage that already tasted suspiciously pre-enjoyed. Looking around, though, most people didn’t seem to mind. The cellar was packed with punters, the array of people that even after only a couple of days he recognised as standard Festival-goers. A bunch of shrill, braying, ex-public schoolboys stood perilously near to him, their laughter getting louder the more they drank, while around them milled a motley assortment of tourists looking for cheap entertainment, actors there to support or malign their competitors, and a huddle of whey-faced individuals who Cain had come quickly to identify as reviewers, easily spotted by the shell-shocked expressions of those who not only had to sit through hours of this crap every day for the month-long duration of the Fringe, but also then write something coherent about it; almost uniformly they sported the unhealthy complexions of people who hadn’t been outdoors in days and were subsisting on a diet of cheap wine, strong coffee and chips. Several were dazedly consulting notepads, as if checking what they were actually here to see, which Cain had some sympathy with: he had been in the city less than 72 hours and was already starting to know how they felt. There was also a smattering of what Cain believed were called Goths, though with their hair frizzing in the humidity and their eyeliner running in the heat they looked a pale – ha!, he thought, darkly amused – imitation of their namesakes. Cain had run into a few Visigoths in his time, and he couldn’t help wonder what they would make of the fact that their legacy had been to label a bunch of over-sensitive teens with a taste for dreary music. Not that big on sensitivity, the Visigoths, as Cain recalled. Still, it meant he’d come to the right place.

The Goths, he assumed, were drawn by the same thing he was, though he imagined they had a very different purpose in mind. Unfolding the cheaply printed scrap of paper from his pocket, he scowled as he read again about tonight’s ‘entertainment’ – ‘No, No, Nosferatu!’ it exclaimed (he had learned quickly that exclamation marks were considered almost compulsory at the Festival), promising ‘A macabre musical masterpiece with a soupçon of sinister farce’. Cain wasn’t even sure he understood what some of those words meant, but none of them sounded good. Then a thin, lanky boy, stooping under the low roof, moved aside, and something caught Cain’s eye. All of a sudden, the game had changed.





Chapter 2




He spotted what she was at once, though at this distance it was hard to be 100% sure. Once the boy had moved from his sightline, he had a clear line of vision to her, and the signs all seemed to be there. To an unpractised eye, she might just look like just another woman on a night out, but Cain knew trouble when he saw it.

For a start, she was wearing an expression that he was pretty sure was mirrored by his own: the look of someone who, right now, would rather be undergoing major surgery. The other indications were more subtle, but Cain had a lifetime of experience of looking. At first sight she was fairly ordinary, if undeniably attractive: a petite, dark-skinned black woman, calmly if warily regarding the scene in front of her. She could have been any other tourist having second thoughts about her entertainment choices – though the ‘tourist’ option was belied by the fact that she wore a t-shirt adorned with the legend ‘Fuck off, I’m a local, I don’t want a fucking flier’. She had a compact, athletic body and her overall look was unfussy and utilitarian: t-shirt, jeans and hair cut into a short afro that emphasised the strong features of a woman who would more accurately be described as handsome rather than pretty, though that was possibly because a generous mouth was set in the hard line of someone who thought ‘pretty’ was a frivolous option; but she wasn’t completely unadorned. On her wrist she wore a thick silver chain – loose enough, he noticed, to be slipped over her knuckles if need be – and the long, thin pendant she wore on a chain round her neck had a suspiciously stake-like quality to it. If that wasn’t enough, she’d chosen the same stance he had: back against the wall, despite the unpleasantly clammy feel of the stone, feet planted in exactly the right position to launch herself forward or avoid being pushed back. Then she turned, slightly, and he knew beyond doubt he was right. A vicious scar ran from under one ear, right across her throat and then disappearing into the scoop neck of her top, and when she raised her glass to her lips, he saw a matching gouge on her forearm. Cain had seen plenty of defensive wounds before – many of them in the mirror – and he knew one when he saw it. So, there was another hunter in the room. He wasn’t quite sure if that was a good thing or a bad thing.

Out of professional courtesy, he kept his gaze on her long enough for it to register. She turned, frowning slightly, as the sixth sense humans had about being looked at finally kicked in. He watched her notice his attention, ready to dismiss him as just another guy checking her out, but then she did the same inventory he did and came to the same conclusion, her eyes widening slightly in shocked recognition. Cain let the realisation sink in for a moment then raised his glass and nodded towards the bar – that universal signal for ‘can I get you another?’. After a moment’s hesitation, she gave a cautious nod. Cain finished his pint in one go, grimacing – it really was pretty disgusting – then headed to the bar.

It only took a few moments for him to return. Even in a venue this crowded, people tended to let him through – humans were far better than they gave themselves credit for at recognising danger and getting the hell out of its way. The one man he had had to nudge aside, a giant who was probably used to being the scariest thing in a room, spun angrily to remonstrate before taking one look at Cain’s face and realising, really, there was no harm done and he would just go back to enjoying his night in peace. So it was barely a couple of minutes before the angel slid into place beside the human hunter, though somehow that had been enough time for the lager he was holding to alchemise, managing to go from the near-Arctic, finger-freezing temperature it had been served at to unpleasantly tepid, without seeming to pass through any drinkable range in-between – a feat which was unheard of in nature but, he was learning, was commonplace in any entertainment venue. Plus he fucking hated plastic glasses – on principle Cain liked a receptacle he could turn into a weapon, but these also seemed designed to make it impossible to carry a drink without spilling it. Cain was a man of many talents, but even he hadn’t managed the short journey from bar to wall without leaving a damp stripe of beer down the front of his jeans.

The woman took her glass with a nod of acknowledgement, slipping it into the empty one she still held, and took a long drink, not quite able to hide her distaste at the contents. She waited for him to say something, then when he didn’t, she tilted her head with a wary smile, her eyes cool.

“Don’t tell me… what’s a nice girl like me doing on a gig like this?”

It had the ring of a line she’d heard many times before, but Cain just shrugged.

“You don’t seem all that nice to me,” he said, leaning back against the wall, and he just had time to see the corners of her mouth turn upwards slightly before the lights went dim and a badly amplified voice announced the show was going to start and pleaded for mobile phone silence. Cain looked down at his drink: it was the curse of an angelic metabolism that he couldn’t really ever get properly drunk, and certainly not drinking watered-down swill like this. Then, as a be-cloaked figure strode onto the makeshift stage and burst into song, he realised it didn’t matter, after all. There wasn’t enough beer in the world.

***

It was later. Much, much, much later – though when Cain glanced at his watch, he was shocked to see that barely 70 minutes had gone by.

“Jesus Christ. I think that was the longest hour of my life.”

The woman looked down at his folded arms – the beer had lasted less than 3 minutes into the performance, and he’d held the stance of an unhappy bouncer ever since – raising an eyebrow at the network of scars plainly visible on his skin.

“Really?”

Cain paused, taking a moment to cast his mind back. He had flashes of horrific violence, of torture, the taste of blood and dirt in his mouth and the white hot memory of steel in his skin, of fire and acid and whips and claws. But, at least, there had been no singing.

“Yup. Pretty much.”

She smiled properly at that, a wide-mouthed smile that revealed a slight chip in a lower tooth and a small scar on the inside of her lower lip; it made her somehow more appealing than a perfect smile would be, and he felt himself warm to her, realising with a pang just how long it had been since anyone had looked at him with anything but distrust or fear.

“Might have known the damn thing would be a bust anyway,” he said. “You want to go get a real drink somewhere and compare notes? I’m Cain, by the way.”

He held out a hand, which she shook firmly. When she spoke, her voice was a low Scottish burr, though with a transatlantic tinge.

“Dionne. As in Warwick, not Celine, obviously,” she said, which was presumably something a human would understand and react to, since she seemed puzzled by Cain’s blank look. “So… you have somewhere in mind?”

He nodded down at her t-shirt.

“You’re the local. You tell me.”





Chapter 3




It was a crappy night to be undead, the zombie thought miserably, as he made his way towards Cockburn Street. The Scottish climate had responded as it seemed to every year, as if so affronted by the hordes of incomers the Festival attracted it tried to wash itself clean of them, which combined with this year’s unseasonably hot summer meant that it was either constantly raining or boiling hot, so you tramped around in steaming clothes that never entirely got dry – his shoes were waterlogged and his jeans stuck unpleasantly to his thighs, giving him an authentic-looking zombie shuffle, with the added joy of chafing, which presumably real zombies never had to worry about. Plus the bloody place itself seemed out to vex him. People thought of Edinburgh and they conjured up images of the castle and the Royal Mile, the dramatic swoops of landscape that made the city so beautiful, the wide boulevards like Princes Street. But Edinburgh was a city that had built on itself – the Old Town was a warren of alleys and cellars, a place of hills and layers and levels, of steep stone steps that seemed to wind to nowhere, never quite letting you out at the destination you hoped for. The unusual geography meant that there were whole streets in Edinburgh where you could walk into the ground floor of a building at the front only to find that you were storeys higher up at the back, as if the very architecture was out to trick the unwary. He’d already lost his friends by taking a ‘shortcut’, and had had to run away from a group of local neds outside a KFC who had showed their appreciation for the arts by pelting him with chips. And now he was again trudging through one of the city’s famous (and numerous) narrow ‘closes’, getting halfway down a perilous, curving set of uneven steps only to discover the route that showed up on his map was actually blocked, iron railings proclaiming it private property.

“Shit,” he muttered, furiously. He hadn’t expected a stint as a zombie to be Hamlet at the RSC, but this was turning out to be way crappier than anything he could have imagined. Then the thing came at him out of nowhere, and he realised just how much worse things could be.





Chapter 4




It wasn’t even 9pm when Cain and Dionne emerged from the cellar, blinking and slightly dazed, and followed the other patrons out into the street. Even at this hour, the pavements were crowded. The Edinburgh Fringe Festival was the largest arts festival in the world; over the course of August nearly 3,000 shows would be performed and 2 million tickets sold, as around 20,000 performers from over 60 countries vied for the attention of visitors and the media. Every year this usually stately city was transformed into a seething mass of tourists, critics and performers, every venue that could fit more than three people and a microphone stand hastily repurposed as a performance space. The streets bustled not only with incomers but with those who made their money from this influx: entertainers performed tricks while others handed out fliers hawking their shows, or sat at makeshift stalls selling souvenirs, bottled water or snacks. Beggars and Big Issue sellers hoped the holiday spirit opened wallets, then there were those who took a more direct approach to obtaining the visitors’ money; Edinburgh in August was a pickpocket’s paradise, and Cain had already broken several sets of fingers that had mistakenly strayed a little too far into his clothing. He hated crowds at the best of times – for a self-styled protector of humanity, Cain didn’t actually like people themselves all that much – and he was far more used to working in those parts of the world where two people and half a dozen goats would be counted as traffic congestion. Crowds of slow moving people either taking photographs or trying to sell him things seemed like a particularly cruel and unusual kind of torture. At least at night, though, he was spared the daylight soundtrack of the city, a monstrous cacophony where bagpipers on every corner competed with the constant clamour of roadworks, as the main streets were being dug up to accommodate a tram system so long-delayed that the locals could be heard grumbling that by the time it was ready, it would be unnecessary, since by then they’d all be in flying cars. Of the two sounds, Cain preferred the pneumatic drills and jackhammers; he’d taken to keeping on the opposite side of the road to any pipers, worried that he might snap and beat them to death with their own infernal instruments, though he suspected that might win him some serious applause from passing onlookers.

How long had it been like this, he wondered? He hadn’t been to Edinburgh in nearly two centuries – not since the days when the whole populace had been crammed within the walls of the Old Town, when he’d made a brief but bloody hunting foray to stop some ghouls (in the most literal sense) who had tried to take advantage of the city’s overcrowding to carry out a little population control of their own. In those days it was a grim, grimy place; vast hordes of the poor lived in a cramped, dangerous underground warren that had been dug out beneath towering tenements, as the city tried to cope with a population that doubled in less than 30 years. The New Town – built in stages through the 18th and 19th centuries, so to Cain genuinely fairly new – had solved many of those problems, and today it was a beautiful, prosperous place, the seat of Scottish government and a magnet for tourists even outside the Festival madness. Edinburgh had taken its grisly past and turned it into profitable nostalgia: there were tours now that would take you to the sites of witch burnings, to subterranean streets where plague victims had been walled in to die or to Greyfriars’ cemetery, where the graves were caged to prevent the bodies being stolen by the Resurrection Men, those enterprising sorts who had dug up fresh corpses to sell to the nearby medical schools. But Cain well remembered those more dangerous days, and it felt strange, in such vibrant times, to once again be hunting something that stalked the dark corners of the town.

None of this affected the throng surrounding him, of course. The pubs along Cowgate were heaving, drinkers spilling out onto the street to take advantage of the fact the rain had stopped to enjoy the warmth or grab a smoke. Dionne seemed to have a fair idea of where she was going, and wove in and out of the pedestrians at admirable speed, though even her t-shirt couldn’t protect her from the occasional opportunistic ticket tout. But when the third drunk student stumbled into her path, Cain decided he was done with his, and felt his never-very-extensive patience evaporate.

“Shout when we get where we’re going,” he called behind him as he strode ahead, grabbing her hand and pulling her through the crowds.



Normally any strange bloke who thought buying her a drink entitled him to pull this kind of macho bullshit would be curled up on the ground with his entire world focused on the boot-shaped dent in his genitals, especially some cocky white boy who seemed a little too fond of giving orders. Dionne had met plenty of other hunters before, and they weren’t usually built for modesty, so it was always best to come down hard, first, lest they get ideas. But her annoyance in this case was defeated by sheer fascination. She could cut through a crowd with the skill of a local, but Cain didn’t have to – everywhere he moved, people simply weren’t in his way. It didn’t even seem deliberate, more some innate reaction to whatever ‘move or I’ll mow you down’ signal Cain emitted; even a juggler stepped back as Cain moved towards him, his burning clubs clattering to the ground as he was no longer there to catch them, Cain and Dionne already half a street away.

“Here!” she yelled, almost breathless at the speed of their progress, and Cain stopped so abruptly she slammed into the back of him. As he seemed to be constructed almost completely out of muscle, she couldn’t pretend that was an entirely unpleasant sensation, and possibly took a moment longer than she should have to pull back to a respectable distance. This might be a work gig, but she’d certainly had uglier partners, and didn’t see anything wrong with enjoying the scenery while she was here. She nodded down a dimly lit alley where a small, hand painted sign was barely visible in the murk. Cain hesitated, and she could sense it, that quick scan for danger, the recognition that this – like everything – could be a trap. She had called it right, she knew then: this guy was definitely a real hunter, not some wannabe who had watched too much TV.

“My round this time,” she said, and Cain nodded, taking one more brief assessment and then following her.



Dionne watched from the bar as he sat down, taking the spot she herself would have chosen: a booth, so nothing behind it, in a corner so it had a good view of the bar and the exits. He scanned the room much the same way she did, and clearly came up with the same conclusions: nothing to worry about here. It was a Tuesday night crowd, mainly locals who were grateful the pub’s isolation kept it off the Festival circuit, though even here there wasn’t a complete escape, as evinced by a couple of American tourists who sat nursing a beer – their origins plain by their giant cameras, matching Kagools and the slightly stunned expressions of people wondering how they’d been sitting down for 20 minutes and no one had tried to sell them tickets to anything.

“So,” she said, putting down the drinks. She saw Cain’s look of relief at being given proper beer in actual glass. “We compare notes? I’m guessing you’re not here for the culture.”

Cain gave a slight huff of laughter.

“That what they’re calling it? Honestly, humans have created some of the most magnificent art in the world and now we’re reduced to musicals about fucking vampires. You know there’s a play about the Great Fire of London? Set to music. I saw half of it. The actual fire was more fun.” Cain took a breath, as if realising he had possibly said too much, and Dionne stared at him, trying to ignore the many things that were wrong with that sentence. She pretty much agreed with the sentiment, but the words ‘humans’ and ‘most of’ were particularly bothering her. Cain took a drink and, arranging his face into a friendlier expression – she could see that took some effort – he went on. “Here’s what I know, and it’s probably less than you, if you’re based here. Last couple of years there have been noises about something weird… weirder… happening around the Fringe. Violent things. And we’re not just talking a couple of English tourists getting glassed cause they walk into a pub in the wrong part of town and start extolling how ‘quaint’ it is. Nobody’s talking numbers – nobody in the human or the Other world wants to start seeing ‘serial killer at the Fringe’ headlines – but I hear a handful of bodies already turned up this year, so we can figure at least a dozen over the last couple of years, probably a few more we don’t know about. No one was saying vampire last year, so it didn’t land on my radar, but this year I heard a few rumours and thought I’d check it out. Something picking off tourists is going to bring a whole load of heat on themselves, and not just from hunters.”

“So this isn’t usually your beat?”

“No,” he said, with a slight shake of his head. “Not much usually happening in the UK so I’m mostly… overseas. But I had some, ah, business in London and heard about it, so thought it couldn’t hurt to check it out. Something about it has my hackles up, and I figure this level of crazy hides a whole load of sins. That your take?”

She shrugged, taking a slug of her beer.

“Tell you the truth, this aside,” she gestured to her t-shirt, then waited until his eyes returned to her face before continuing. It took a while, which was encouraging: nobody was that slow a reader. “I’m not local any more. Like you say, not much to do in the cities.”

“You work the Highlands?”

“I used to, a little, but honestly…” this time the gesture took in her whole appearance. “Some of those Highland towns, the vampires fit in more than me.”

He smiled at that.

“Yeah, they do breed ‘em pale up here. I always wondered what the appeal of all that blue dye was when they’re pretty much that colour already.”

Again, there was a certain ‘what’s wrong with this picture’ element to that sentence that Dionne tried not to dwell on as he continued talking.

“So, I’m guessing… the States, maybe, with that accent?”

She nodded.

“So you’re just here for this gig too?”

Dionne was annoyed to feel her face grow warm.

“Um, no. My mum… my mum still lives here, and she had a fall, little while back. I’m just here to look after her until she recuperates.”

“Ah. It’s just you two, then?”

“Yeah, my dad died a few years back.”

Cain nodded, as though she was confirming something he already knew, and while she was pleased he didn’t do the whole ‘I’m sorry’ thing that she found so annoying, there was something in that inscrutable, ‘nothing ever surprises me’ expression that made her defensive.

“If this is where you guess that the thing that killed him was the trigger that got me into hunting, you’re out of luck. ‘Fraid it was nothing more sinister than the Scottish diet. He had a heart attack. I suppose I could have firebombed a couple of Gregg’s shops in retaliation, but that seems a little extreme…”

He said nothing ,which was starting to get on her nerves. Dionne was usually a woman content with quiet – most hunters spent a lot of time alone – but something about Cain’s silence was a void, and she was irritated by her own drive to fill it, hating how touchy it made her sound.

“I’ve met plenty of hunters in my time, you know,” she snapped. “So if you’re waiting for the part where we swap tragic backstories and you impress my pants off with your badass tales of daring, this is going to be a pretty disappointing conversation for you.”

Cain raised an eyebrow the tiniest fraction, green eyes amused. And, she couldn’t help notice, really extraordinarily green.

“Don’t meet a lot of hunters myself. That normally how it goes?”

Realising how defensive she was being – she was so used to hunters being jerks she seemed to be acting the part herself – Dionne allowed her expression to soften into a smile.

“Sometimes works the other way round.”

That, at least, elicited a laugh.

“Yeah, well, these days I don’t feel that badass.”

She rolled her eyes at that.

“You do have the air of a man who spends his downtime raising puppies.”

He gave a rueful smile at that, and a wave of weariness seemed to wash over him. He ran his hand across his scalp, ruffling his hair in a way that made her palm itch to do the same (OK, she mentally admitted, she was possibly enjoying the scenery a little too much, now) and sighed.

“I admit I’ve had my moments. But these days I’m trying to live a little more low key life. Problem is the world doesn’t seem to want to let me.”

As if to prove his point, it was at that precise moment that the monsters attacked.





Chapter 5




“I am so, so sorry.” Dionne wasn’t used to having to turn the charm onto people – usually her weapons were a little more… well, weapon-y… but she had the sincerity ramped up to 11 and was smiling so hard her face hurt, desperately trying to give off ‘friendly and harmless’ vibes, not an easy thing for a woman who once killed a young werewolf using nothing more than a fork. She held the glass of whisky in the man’s trembling fingers, closing his grip until she was sure he wouldn’t drop it. “I really don’t know what to say. We’re so sorry. He just panicked.”

She looked from the traumatised drinker to Cain, who was standing at a safe distance, arms folded, looking neither particularly apologetic nor like an individual prone to panic. Dionne, though, was almost as shaken as the man beside her. It had happened so quickly, and there had been nothing she could do to stop it.

The doors had burst open and in they had surged, a crowd of groaning zombies, arms outstretched, their moans drowning out the noise of the pub as they rounded on the punters, shaking gory fists. Dionne froze, startled, but quickly realised what was happening and relaxed – but in that moment of understanding Cain had launched himself over the table towards them, and that’s when the real screaming started.

He took down one with an elbow to the throat, which barely slowed down the momentum he used to deliver a stunning headbutt that crumpled a second, before spinning with a roundhouse kick that folded a third in half. At first the ‘zombies’ froze – was this part of the show? Then he grabbed a fourth and bounced his head hard off the nearest table, and there was no way the fountain of blood that erupted from his shattered nose was fake. Dionne threw herself into the melee as the actors’ undead façade crumbled faster than zombie fingers in a firm handshake, and they fell over one another trying to get out of Cain’s way.

“Jesus! Don’t hurt us! Don’t hurt us!” one screamed as Cain grabbed him by the front of his shirt, lifting him off his feet, and his plummy English accent was so resolutely un-zombie-like that Cain hesitated for a fraction of a second, fist pulled back to deliver a blow, and that pause was enough for Dionne to have time to grab his arm.

“It’s a show! Cain, it’s a show!” she yelled, as the actors scrabbled away from him, terrified.

“She’s right! She’s right, it’s a show!” the boy babbled – and Christ, he was a boy; beneath all the make-up she could see he could barely be out of his teens. “Look! We have a flier! We have a flier! We’re supposed to be here!”

He waved a piece of paper in front of Cain as if it had magical defensive properties. Cain, scowling, lowered him to the floor where he sagged in a heap, and took the paper, though Dionne snatched it from his hand. Confused, she handed it to the pub landlord, who had come from behind the bar, pool cue in hand, looking less than happy at the carnage.

“This is the Auld Jock, right?” the boy whimpered, eyes darting desperately between them. Dionne gave Cain a light shove, steering him away from the fallen zombie.

“Ah, no,” the landlord frowned, light dawning. “This is the old Auld Jock. You want the new Auld Jock. That’s a few streets back, towards the Grass Market. This is a local pub. We don’t do Festival stuff in here.”

The boy looked crestfallen.

“I… God, I’m so sorry, I’m just standing in for a mate who didn’t show up… I… we’re just students from St Andrews… it’s supposed to be a joke…”

Dionne nodded to the landlord, who was as keen as she was to avoid one of these posh boys deciding to call the police and get Daddy the lawyer involved. The man gestured to one of the barmen, who hurried over with a bottle and some glasses and got busy with the pouring. Between them, they managed to get most of Cain’s victims up and sipping (though she noticed that, clearly a man with a strong sense of self-preservation, the barman had also taken the time to pour Cain a measure as well). Dionne suspected that taking out three people in one move had diluted the force of Cain’s attack and was the only reason they were all still breathing: the boy who she’d saved from a punch to the face might well not have been so lucky. She didn’t look at Cain, but she could feel him glowering, radiating a sense of affronted confusion – if things were going to pretend to attack people, they could hardly be angry when those people retaliated – and was bristling with the desire to hit something else. He made no effort to assist in the clean-up; partly, she suspected, because he rightly guessed that any move towards the actors would most likely trigger another round of screaming. She sympathised, a little – the Fringe was a trial for people like them, trained to punch their way through a problem – but she was feeling a little confused herself. She’d been a hunter over 20 years – longer, she would guess, than the man in front of her – and she’d never seen anyone move that fast. No-one human, anyway.

“I really am very sorry. He’s not long back from Afghanistan, I think you triggered a flashback…”

She figured that was an easy lie to sell about Cain, whose hair was just about short enough to be a grown out military cut, and who certainly had the air of a soldier about him. At this, the boy looked genuinely mortified.

“Oh! I’m terribly sorry!” he blurted, and while Cain looked unmoved, Dionne had to stifle a smile. You could always rely on British embarrassment: they would hardly be calling the police on their own social faux pas.

“It’s perfectly fine! No harm done, eh?” she said, perhaps a little too brightly, because the boy currently holding a bar towel full of ice cubes to his swollen and bloody face looked a little less ready to forgive and forget. But the others seized upon the explanation with alacrity – a huge misunderstanding, let’s all pretend it never happened and that a stranger in a pub didn’t nearly beat four of us to death in under a minute. “We’ll leave you to it, I think we’d best get back to the hotel to get his medication!”

She handed the landlord a sheaf of notes, a signal to keep the alcohol coming. Luckily this was a man who used to drink with her father – one of the reasons she liked this place was it was where her dad had brought her and let her have her first legally purchased half of cider on the day she turned 18 – so while there were probably stern words coming later, they wouldn’t be tonight. He gave her a nod that acknowledged as much, and she grabbed Cain’s arm and dragged him out of the pub.





Chapter 6




“Well, that was…” Dionne paused. Impressive, she thought. Slightly terrifying. “Pretty stupid,” she said. Cain looked sullen, but also guilty, aware of his own over-reaction.

“I fucking hate this city. I really don’t understand hu… civilians, sometimes.”

“Yeah, you and me both on that one,” she admitted.

“Any chance of us actually getting that drink, do you reckon?”

Dionne hesitated, a half-formed idea surfacing. Then she shrugged. What the hell, you only live once, she thought, and he really had looked pretty good chucking himself over that table.

“How about we do another patrol and see if we pick up anything freaky… freakier,” she conceded, at his sceptical look. “Then I know a place.”

“Zombie free?”

“I guarantee it.”



How do you track a freak when the whole world is full of them? Or, even more bafflingly, has decided to dress like them? Cain’s mood had darkened from its usual baseline of pissed off cynicism to an irritation that was threatening to boil into rage, not helped by the fact that he was also angry at himself. He’d been weakened by that big fight in London, where he’d taken down an ancient vampire who was trying to start a war; months later, he still wasn’t entirely recovered, and he was aware that it was throwing him off his game. He’d become increasingly trigger-happy, punching first and asking questions later, and while that wasn’t always a bad thing to be – in his line of work, it was often the only way to be – he knew that it was starting to make him reckless, and that could have dangerous consequences. As an immortal creature, he’d always been careful with his power – it was enormous, but not infinite – so the toll this had taken on him was both unexpected and worrying. There was more than one ancient vampire in the world, and Cain had always assumed that if normal hunter tricks didn’t work then he had plenty of reserves to call on. The thought that that might not be the case wasn’t one he wanted to contemplate too closely.

Despite his dark mood, which was exacerbated by the fact that people dressed as aliens or warlocks kept trying to hand him things, he was enjoying Dionne’s company. He spent little time with other hunters, since they were trained to be observant and had the inconvenient habit of noticing all the tell-tale signs he wasn’t human, like a tendency not to age and the ability to recover from what should be fatal wounds. He’d forgotten that they could be relaxing company, since they were good at not talking, though admittedly few of them were as attractive as the woman at his side. He batted that thought aside, hastily, because it brought to mind another woman, and he had told himself he wouldn’t think about Cass any more.

Cass, his ex-lover, the woman who had helped him save London. He’d expected that victory to be celebrated with the passion they brought out in one another, one that humans had only rarely inspired in him, but had been bitterly disappointed, since Cass had chosen that moment to assert the independence he so liked about her, and kick him to the kerb. He tried not to dwell on the knowledge that this had more than a little to do with the fact that he had only recently got round to revealing his angelic nature, and explaining that he was still, technically, married to a Viking war goddess, because every time he thought about that, he had to concede she had every right to be mad at him, and he preferred to feel self-righteously aggrieved at her decision. If Cass were here, though, she wouldn’t be silently scanning the side streets and pedestrians for aberrations, she’d be keeping up a running commentary, asking him lots of awkward questions and confusing him with references to popular culture. Her Sense – a gift she had for picking up on things that were wrong or supernatural – would come in handy, though, he admitted to himself. It would certainly cut down on all this patrolling, slicing through the chaos of the crowds, which were muddying even Cain’s long-honed hunter’s instincts and superhuman senses. But even as he thought that, he was knew he was lying, and that wasn’t why he wanted her here.





Chapter 7




The vampire, too, wasn’t having the best of evenings.

“When is a shortcut not a shortcut?” she muttered to herself, happy to rant aloud since there was no one else around. “When it gets you frigging lost.”

She knew it was only supposed to be 15 minutes between the venue and the tiny flat where she and three other people were staying, crammed in like sardines for the duration of the Festival, but she had foolishly listened to one of her flatmates assuring her there was a shortcut, which would lop five minutes off the journey – and every second was a benefit when you were sloping around in a corset and a heavy velvet frock, since her director was keen on ‘historical accuracy’, though he seemed to translate this for the women in the cast as ‘tops that push your boobs up’. That look might be fine for actual vampires, she conceded, but humans needed to breathe, and that was hard enough running around in a thick cloak in an un-air-conditioned room without adding crushed ribs into the equation. But somehow she had taken a wrong turn and now had to double back, negating any savings and annoying herself in the process, since she’d forgotten to charge her iPhone – there was never a free socket in a flat where everyone constantly had a gadget plugged in – and it was now tucked into her bodice, a useless anachronism. Why couldn’t she have just got a job in a bloody soap and spend the rest of her life selling tales of her romantic misadventures to OK magazine? Instead she was working with a drama school graduate who thought he was Peter fucking Hall and who kept telling her they were ‘returning the myth of the vampyre’ – yes, he spelled it with a bloody ‘y’ – ‘to its true horrific roots’. If he wanted horror so much, she thought darkly, he should try wearing this much underwiring. And the sodding cape snagged on everything – she’d nearly come a cropper just the night before when it got tangled on someone in the front row of the audience. And, of course, as if to prove her right, at the exact moment she thought that, she was jerked backwards as it caught on something, almost pulling her off her feet. She turned, ready to untangle herself from whatever modern day urban obstacle capes weren’t designed to deal with. Then she saw the man holding onto it, and didn’t even have time to scream.





Chapter 8




“Fuck!”

Dionne had just about given up on this whole patrolling idea, when Cain let out a curse and dived down an alley at near-superhuman speed. Puzzled but alert, she followed him, only to stop at the mouth of the alley as she realised he hadn’t gone any further and had simply ducked out of sight off the street. She looked around, senses suddenly alert; she hadn’t taken her gun into the theatre in case it got spotted, but she could handle herself unarmed, though she tried not to imagine what could spook a hunter like Cain. Still, he didn’t actually seem in any hurry to move, but was just watching the passers-by with an unhappy look on his face.

“Fuck,” he muttered again, then, realising she made excellent cover, he yanked her towards him so that she was obscuring any view of him from the street. This also had the side effect of making sure they were standing very close together, and she also couldn’t avoid realising this didn’t feel like a Terrible Thing. She looked up at him, amused, a touch of playfulness in her voice.

“So is this where we pretend to make out to throw the bad guys off our scent?” she smiled to show she was joking, even though she wasn’t entirely sure that was the case. Then, realising what she was doing, she stepped back slightly, annoyed that she was letting herself be thrown by proximity to a hot guy, impressive though he undoubtedly was. That was one of the problems of a hunter’s life – it tended to bring long stretches of celibacy, and sometimes that could addle a gal’s judgement. Luckily Cain didn’t seem to have noticed either her remark or her back-pedalling; his gaze remained fixed on the street. Curious, Dionne turned and followed his eye line. When she realised what she was looking at, she was even more confused.

The Indian-looking woman was undeniably stunning, but nothing about her set Dionne’s warning bells off. Just another tourist taking in the town, she was dressed casually in a knee-length skirt and dark silk top that complemented her colouring, long black hair tied into a casual ponytail; the only suspicious thing about her was how she was managing to negotiate the Edinburgh cobbles in heels that made Dionne’s ankles buckle just looking at them. She seemed to be examining the menu on display in a restaurant window, though Dionne, ever careful, conceded she could be using the reflection to check for any tails.

“So, are we just avoiding an ex-girlfriend?” she asked. As she did, another woman approached their target; a petite, curvy redhead in jeans and Converse trainers, a canvas jacket thrown over a t-shirt, she looked equally unassuming, though Dionne’s eyebrows raised as the redhead nuzzled into the other woman’s neck for a moment then, taking her hand, pulled her away from the restaurant, pointing towards somewhere else further down the street. Neither looked behind them as they went; civilian behaviour. “Um, I have to tell you if that’s the case, I’m pretty sure she’s moved on.”

Cain peered over her shoulder, looking almost anxious.

“There’s just the two of them, though, right?”

“You were expecting someone else?”

“Honestly, with my luck, pretty much.”

Dionne frowned at him.

“So… you going to tell me what the hell that was all about?”

He paused, reluctant.

“You asked if she was an ex. There was… someone. It went bad. They’re her friends and… I’d rather avoid seeing her, if I can.”

She nodded – that she could relate to.

“She didn’t like the life? Or didn’t believe it existed?” She’d had her own share of lovers who’d thought she was crazy; it was a peril of the trade. He gave an awkward shrug.

“It’s… let’s just say neither of us was crazy about the other’s career choices.”

“You think it’s a coincidence her friends being here?”

“I dunno. They’re Scottish, they both have family in Scotland, I think, so it’s not like they don’t have a reason to be in town. I mean, I guess they get holidays, so why would they not come here? I don’t like coincidences, but then I have been told that I have an overly suspicious nature.”

“You think we should check them out? That they might be in danger?”

At that, at least, he smiled.

“No, they’re tougher than they… Wait, did you hear that?”

Dionne started to shake her head; she’d heard nothing above the usual clamour of the evening. But before she could respond, Cain had taken off at a run – and this time he had his gun drawn. Cursing, Dionne followed him.





Chapter 9




The woman was dead already – with his enhanced senses, Cain could tell from several feet away that she wasn’t breathing, though even the dimmest human might have made a fair guess at that, since she seemed to be missing a big chunk of her throat. The vampire was crouched over her, his long body folded almost in half, pale hands tinged with her blood, face inches away from the wound, looking as if he were about to embrace her. He looked up, startled, at Cain’s arrival, then looked even more alarmed when Dionne crashed into view behind him.

“Ah,” he straightened, slowly, hands raised in surrender, though his expression was more an odd mixture of embarrassment and amusement than anything resembling fear. “Well, now, this is awkward,” he frowned, his voice velvet. “I admit it doesn’t look terribly good, but I do hope you’ll give me the opportunity to explain.”

Dionne stared, astonished, not knowing how to react. Cain, though, had no such problem, and in one smooth movement lunged forward and punched the vampire square in the face.



The vampire folded easily under the blow though less, to Dionne’s experienced eyes, because he was genuinely felled by it, more to avoid fighting back. He looked up at Cain, vaguely reproachful, and she could see Cain clenching and unclenching his fists, as if it was a physical effort not to strike him again. The vampire however seemed completely unfazed, and, indeed, with the grace of his kind, the handsome monster managed to make it look like sprawling on the ground in rain soaked alleys was what all the stylish young men were doing these days.

“Delightful as it is to see you as ever, hunter, and while I am always pleased to see I can incite such passion in you, I had rather hoped our recent détente meant that we had progressed beyond you hitting me for no reason.”

“I call a dead girl a reason.”

The vampire looked as if he was manfully restraining himself from rolling his eyes at that, and though he spoke to Cain, he was looking at Dionne, his feline smile unnerving.

“Well, now you have vented your dislike for me with your usual eloquence, and proven to your delectable companion what a ferocious specimen of alpha male masculinity you are, perhaps we can behave like civilised people? Though should you wish to settle this ‘who is the better man’ competition in the traditional method of comparing the size of our genitalia, I’m more than happy to oblige.” This time his smile was definitely aimed at Dionne, even if his words clearly weren’t. “After all, you know already how I’d measure up.”

She tried not to boggle at that – what the hell was going on here? – but Cain said nothing. Reluctantly, he reached down, grabbed the vampire’s shirt and pulled him, not exactly gently, to his feet. It was then she noticed he really was dressed as a vampire; he had on the full regalia, from the dress shirt with the long, frilly cuffs to a satin lined cape. He bounced, slightly, as he sprang to his feet with a grace that suggested he’d been in no need of Cain’s assistance to stand, and Cain looked at him as if he wasn’t sure who he wanted to shoot first, the vampire or himself. Then he, too, finally registered the vampire’s attire.

“Are you fucking kidding me with this outfit? You look like a costume shop dummy.”

The vampire’s smile didn’t falter, clearly unbothered by Cain’s words. Dionne was trying not to gawp. Now she was paying attention – and a man who looked like that demanded attention – it was very obvious that, being the tall, dark and handsome cliché that he was, the vampire (surely faux vampire? Or Cain would have kept on hitting him…) somehow managed to make an outfit this ridiculous look… good. Really, really good. Maybe it was the fact that no amount of frilly shirt could disguise the lean, muscular body beneath it, nor could make-up detract from cheekbones that were sharper than fangs. She half-turned away, determined not to stare, lest she notice just how the artfully drawn streaks of blood at his mouth – she hoped they were drawn on, anyway – seemed to enhance lips that had already had an unfair share of help from nature. Then she blushed, realising she hadn’t turned away quite fast enough for him not to notice her attention, annoyed at the amused delight in the vampire’s gaze.

“Unfortunately, much as I derive endless pleasure from annoying you, in this instance I‘m afraid you could say I am… ah…” he gestured towards the fallen woman. “Deadly serious. So perhaps we could all continue this conversation when we are not in the immediate vicinity of a rapidly cooling corpse?”

He turned to Dionne and held out a hand, raking her with an appreciative glance as he did so – he, too, seemed a pretty slow reader. Real vampire or not, he had the patter down.

“Since our mutual acquaintance here has clearly mislaid whatever manners he once possessed, allow me to introduce myself. I am Laclos.”

She hesitated for a moment before taking his hand, but saw Cain give a tiny nod, and accepted the handshake. His touch was cool –far cooler than a human, but also, she realised, less warm than it would be if he were a vampire who had recently fed. Say, by ripping out the throat of a woman a few minutes ago. She saw him watch her come to that conclusion, his smile widening though, she felt, with a touch of condescension, like someone watching a dog perform a slightly clever trick. Her hunter’s instinct flared: handsome he might be, but this one needed watching.

“Dionne.”

He nodded.

“Named after the singer, perhaps? Warwick, that is, I assume, not Celine?”

She nodded, and saw Cain scowl at that. Clearly not a music lover, though she probably shouldn’t be surprised – he had the air of a man who listened to a lot of classic rock with the car windows rolled down. Laclos looked even more amused by his obvious lack of comprehension.

“Now, you know what I am and I can guess what you are. I assume if you are keeping company with this bundle of sunshine even now your staking fingers are starting to twitch, but if you could refrain from trying to kill me until I wash the dead person smell from my hands, that would be just super. Come, I know a venue.”

“We can’t just leave her like this!” Dionne protested, as Laclos turned to leave and Cain made to follow him. Both men turned back to her, looking blank.

“Do you suggest we carry her corpse through the streets?” Laclos asked, mildly. “Admittedly this is the one time of year we could conceivably do so unmolested, but let us not tempt fate. Her attacker thoughtfully avoided leaving two neat holes or draining her dry – rarely have I been so grateful for sloppy eating habits – so while I have every sympathy for the unfortunate creature, I am afraid we must leave her to her ignoble fate.”

Dionne felt a protest rise in her throat. This went against everything she believed in, but although she hated to admit it, the vampire was right, and she didn’t fancy spending the rest of the night in a police station explaining how she’d stumbled on a mutilated body. But she wasn’t happy about it, and was starting to worry that she’d allied herself to an unknown hunter who seemed on very personal terms with the bad guys. She nodded at Laclos, but shook her wrist slightly, the thick silver chain sliding onto her knuckles. The vampire noticed – as she had wanted him to – and acknowledged the gesture with a tilt of his head.

“Come,” he said again, twirling his cape dramatically as he headed off further into the alley. As she and Cain trudged after him, she heard him murmur, almost to himself. “My. I had forgotten how much I enjoyed having a cape.”





Chapter 10




They were in another pub. This one, though, was clearly part of the circuit, evidenced by the fact that, though Laclos inevitably drew the occasional curious glance, it clearly wasn’t because of his outrageous get up. (And now they were off the streets, she could see just how ridiculous it really was, his natural paleness and dark, expressive eyes enhanced by a lot of make-up, almost-black hair tied back with a velvet ribbon.) Then of course there was also the fact that to get to a table they had to squeeze past a group of zombies, a couple of mutilated Victorian prostitutes, a six foot tall dinosaur and what looked like some medieval monks, which gave a subtle hint to the nature of the venue’s clientele. Dionne shot her fellow hunter a pointed look.

“You’re not going to hit anyone again, are you?” She asked.

Laclos looked amused, which earned him a sour glance from Cain.

“Too early to say,” he scowled, which just made Laclos smile all the more.



“Right,” Cain said, as they took their seats, a table having miraculously become unoccupied as they approached. “You have exactly as long as it takes me to drink this pint to explain to me what the hell you’re doing here and why you look even more of a prick than usual.”

Laclos turned the full warmth of his smile on Dionne, and, even guarded as she was, she had to admit it that was quite a lot of heat.

“For the record,” he purred, his voice low, “I usually look exquisite.”

“He’s usually poncing around half naked,” Cain muttered.

“Quite so, as I said, I usually look exquisite. As to why I’m here, I suspect it is for much the same reason you are venturing into civilisation rather than plying your trade in whatever brutish hellhole your charming nature is more suited to. Unless, perhaps,” his gaze moved slowly between Cain and Dionne. “You are here for an entirely different reason?”

“She decks you with a fist full of silver, vampire, I’m not gonna stop her,” Cain said, his tone mild.

Laclos quirked an eyebrow.

“Ah, I do apologise if I have overstepped the mark.” He looked at Cain, genuinely puzzled. “Forgive me, hunter, but I am frankly baffled as to how someone who looks like you do is even temporarily without intimate companionship. Your personality can’t put them all off, surely?”

“Well,” Dionne interrupted sharply, her voice glacial. “Much as I enjoy a little bromance and being talked about like I’m not in the room, one of you boys needs to stop the bullshit macho posturing and tell me what’s going on, or my mood is going to get a little pointy from here on in.”

“Sorry,” Cain muttered, his eyes dropping to his drink. “This guy just drives me frigging nuts.”

Laclos, however, was looking at her like she’d passed some sort of test.

“Whereas, not being hip-deep in denial myself, I find him utterly delightful. But you are right to upbraid us. We mustn’t let our unbounded joy at this unexpected reunion blind us to the constraints of politeness. I do apologise.”

“Seriously,” she sighed. “Do you always talk like this?”

He gave a slight, regretful bow of the head.

“I’m afraid so, but I have been assured on good authority that most come to find it charming.”

Dionne could actually feel Cain struggling not to comment on that, but Laclos went on. “To answer your main questions, hunter, since you are not here for… recreation, then I assume you have been drawn by the same rumours I have, that there is a rogue vampire – or vampires – using the cover of the Festival to kill.” He turned back to Dionne. “As I am sure you know, that goes against a status quo that has been protected in the major cities on this island for years. We do not kill, you do not hunt. It is a code that it is in the interest of both sides to rigorously enforce, since none of us would welcome the attention of the authorities, and therefore we vampires take an equally stern view of such activities as you do.”

“But why’s it your problem?” Cain asked, then turned to Dionne to explain. “London’s Laclos’ usual haunt. He’s quite the big shot in the city.”

“Ah, he flatters me, though I do have a modest standing in my community, albeit it one which has been… depleted, somewhat, of late.” There was no mistaking the hostility in the look he directed at Cain, who ignored it. These two seemed good at that. He turned back to Dionne. “But I still have a reputation to uphold. There are only a few clans in Edinburgh these days… there was a great purge of supernatural entities in the mid-nineteenth century, around the time of the city’s last Great Fire. Some say it was the Burner himself, though I suspect that particular fable was put about simply to avoid the embarrassing truth that they were caught off guard and quite so thoroughly routed. ” This comment did get a reaction from Cain, who really was now very interested in his beer.

“The Burner?” Dionne asked.

Laclos gave a laconic shrug.

“Even monsters must have their bogeymen, my dear, their tales to be told in the dark. Ours is the unstoppable hunter willing to sacrifice a whole city to rid it of its demons.” He gave a roll of his eyes, clearly sceptical. “Though as said hunter seems to be immortal, inordinately keen on foreign travel and remarkably resistant to capture, I am more inclined to think it is a conflation of tales used for self-aggrandizement. After all, until our… recent and relatively peaceful era, to evade a hunter was seen as retreating in cowardice – we, like you, were expected to slay our enemies. To have escaped the Burner, however, was a mark of valour, or at the very least extreme good luck.”

“So you don’t believe in him?”

Laclos shrugged again – he had a way of doing that which seemed to involve his whole body, a sinuous, sensual movement that triggered unavoidable thoughts of what other movements that body would be capable of. She gave herself a mental shake, aware that this was a vampire’s charm in action; she really should be immune to it by now, but rarely had she encountered it in so concentrated a form.

“I have been alive a long time and all I have ever heard is rumours – and, back in the old times, hunters who styled themselves as such. There’s a belief it’s actually a line of hunters – passed down from generation to generation.”

“What, like a Buffy thing?” Dionne asked. Cain looked blank, but Laclos tilted his head with a smile, amused.

“Quite. They say Van Helsing was one, though his name has now eclipsed them to become synonymous with hunters generally, though I must admit I found the man quite tedious and clumsy, myself, and quite undeserving of the literary fame he finagled his way into.”

Cain made a snort that sounded very much like an agreement, though he still seemed to be inordinately focused on his drink.

“Anyway, historical digression aside…Edinburgh has long been a city of stories, but some of them are true. As a local, I am sure I don’t need to teach you your history, but any dirty, overcrowded city where poverty is rife and life is cheap attracts monsters, and so, monsters abounded. Then came a great exodus of Others, perhaps prompted by the fire, perhaps by whatever caused it. Levels have never quite recovered, so while the vampires who remain here are generally old, they are few in number.”

“And what… they called you in?”

“I have a… history with several of the older vampires here. It was brought to my attention – a little later than ideal, perhaps, since like all sensible creatures they flee the city for the duration of the Fringe, so were less aware of last year’s events – that the killer they fear may be as much of a tourist as we are, and I cannot have a London vampire taking a jaunt to wreak havoc on someone else’s territory, lest they seek to return the favour. At the very least, it’s exceptionally bad etiquette.” His smile became brittle, and a little too bright. “Recent events have taught me nothing if not the importance of keeping one’s own flock in line. I have been… careless of dissent in the past. I am not a creature given to repeating my mistakes.”

“And could you tell, from the corpse… was it definitely a vampire?” Dionne asked.

Laclos looked uncomfortable.

“I… believe so, though even for a vampire with my acuity of senses, with that much blood and so many people so near, it was hard to be certain. Not when there were so many other… sensory distractions.” Cain looked up as he said that and their gazes locked, and though Dionne couldn’t read what passed between the two men, whatever it was seemed to discomfit them both equally.

“OK, fine,” Cain said, a little too gruffly. “But why are you dressed like such a dick?”

Laclos smiled, clearly both used to Cain talking to him like that, and utterly unoffended by it.

“As I am sure your companion could tell you, there’s a disadvantage to being quite this devastatingly attractive. People tend to remember me, unless I compel them not to, and we’re not really supposed to do that anymore, are we?” Cain said nothing. “I wish to blend in with the masses, and how better to do that then…”

“To look like a twat?” Dionne supplied, helpfully.

“I actually think I look quite dashing, despite this inferior tailoring, but if you must, yes. There’s safety in cliché. People see the comedy vampire in the silk lined cloak and they don’t wonder why I am sneaking around in unlit corners asking questions about strange occurrences. For all they know, I am researching the competition, and they do not wish to get close enough to investigate, lest I try to sell them a ticket to something.”

“And what have you come up with?” Cain asked.

“Other than a belief that modern dramatists should be shot, modern actors need to learn elocution and the only thing less amusing than a Shakespearean comedy is an ‘alternative’ stand up comedian? Not an awful amount. Though so far I have endured a musical about bodysnatching – delightfully entitled It’s In the Bag!, should you feel the need to see it – a zombie Swan Lake, a play that seemed to be an authentic recreation of a 1970s sitcom which I feel fortunate enough never to have seen, and an actually quite charming little production called Nights In the Impala, which explores the homoerotic hunter/angel subtext in the American television programme, Supernatural. Though by that stage I may have been swayed by the fact that the young men were both attractive and often unclothed, and my critical standards have been steadily eroded over the course of a couple of evenings.”

“Supernatural? I watch that show…” Dionne said, curious. Cain looked slightly accusing at this revelation – he really did seem offended at the very idea of popular culture – but she just shrugged. “What? I don’t get to watch TV? It’s about hunters, it’s full of hot guys with weapons… what’s not to like? Though… wait, how could it be homoerotic, wasn’t there this whole thing about angels not having genitals…” There was a strangling sound, and she looked at Cain, who seemed now to be choking on his beer. “You OK?”

“Fine,” he scowled, though she distinctly heard a “Christ, I hate people” muttered under his breath, as Laclos continued talking.

“So, while I would quite like to consume both my own ears and eyeballs, I have found little to assist our cause, and the vampires I have consulted seem as baffled as to the transgressor in their midst as I am, and have made their annual pilgrimage from the city, happy to leave the policing to me. Alas, the downside to a status quo that eschews violence is that it also has a tendency to make people somewhat soft and complacent.”

“Yeah, we’ve pretty much struck out too,” Dionne admitted ruefully. “Maybe we’re going about this all wrong, though? Why should they be connected with a show? Why not just another tourist?”

Cain and Laclos both looked at her, surprised, and spoke in unison.

“Because all vampires are attention seeking drama queens,” they said, though Laclos did add, ‘my dear’ at the end of it. Dionne took a long swig of her drink. This was turning into a very, very weird night.



For a conversation between two hunters and the thing they usually hunted, they managed to keep things very civilised – suspiciously so, to Dionne’s eyes. She’d inevitably come across vampires in non-fatal circumstances before, since most of the UK was a non-hunting zone, but such encounters were characterised by mutual wariness, and tended towards the brief. And while Cain’s surface veneer of hostility towards the vampire seemed authentic, it was belied by the fact that he seemed both happy enough to keep talking to him, and remarkably unbothered by the vampire’s less than subtle invasion of his personal space. It was also becoming jarringly noticeable that they avoided addressing, or even referring to, one another by name, a verbal tic that stood out when there seemed to be so much going on non-verbally between them. But despite her reservations, Dionne didn’t feel it was an entirely awful fate to be sitting drinking with two of the best looking men she’d ever seen, even if between them they advanced their case not a centimetre. There was no evidence the killers were with a show, but historical precedence was there, both men argued; vampires were always attracted to the entertainment industry, since it both afforded them an excuse to look different and indulged their impulse for the dramatic, and their type could be found from the ranks of early itinerant players to the offices of modern Hollywood – and in a city full of transients where everyone is playing dress-up, there were plenty of ways to commit a crime unhindered. There was little, however, to link the victims except that they had generally been connected to the Fringe, and all were killed in or near the city centre, in ways that didn’t seem obviously vampiric but which all involved significant blood loss.

“Maybe it isn’t a vampire at all,” Cain had mooted, when they realised their conversation had become circular. “Maybe it’s just a pissed off local.”

“I have some sympathy with that,” Dionne said, looking around the pub. One of the zombies at the next table caught her eye and gave a small, friendly wave. She sighed. “Believe me, I really do.”

Eventually, though, they decided that there was little else they could do that night: a single killer was unlikely to take another victim before tomorrow, and since both Dionne and Cain had daytime tasks to do, getting at least a few hours' rest was essential and they could reconvene and compare notes again the following night. Both men agreed to this parting of the ways with alacrity, which might have something to do with the fact that the vampire had been getting increasingly edgy as they talked, and while he had tried, generally, to keep his attention focused on Dionne, his gaze kept drifting to Cain’s throat. More than once she saw him seem to realise what he was doing and give himself a slight shake, returning his eyes to her. Once their plans had been agreed, he sprang to his feet, eager to be gone.

“Since we have concluded our business, you’ll excuse me while I find a charming young companion or two and convince them to share more than the usual quota of bodily fluids.”

Her disapproval at this must have been evident, because he gave her a slight bow.

“Don’t worry, my dear, I assure you it’s all strictly consensual. Even my harshest critic…” he smiled at Cain when he said that. “Would concede that I take nothing I cannot secure by the force of my personality alone. Dionne, it has been a pleasure to meet you. Hunter,” he gave Cain a curt nod. “An experience, as ever.”

Then with another dramatic swirl of his cape – he clearly did really like wearing that – he was gone.





Chapter 11




Dionne waited until the doors were closed behind him before turning back to Cain, whose face was as unreadable as ever. She guessed that was pretty much his go-to expression, and though as a hunter she had a tendency to default to the stoic herself, she suspected it might be pretty frustrating in the long run, and wondered if not liking the life was the only reason his ex-girlfriend had dumped him. That and his extreme chumminess with the flirty hot vamp, of course, which might put a sensible girl off. Still, the look sort of suited him: true, he wasn’t as smack-you-in-the-face-with-my-beauty gorgeous as the departed vampire, but he had a rugged handsomeness that had an appeal all its own, and it was a long time since she’d seen that kind of body on anyone who wasn’t just a preening gym bunny. That was the problem being a hunter: you were a hard person in a soft world, and it was refreshing to come up against someone who had as many sharp edges as she did. She considered, for a moment, exactly what she wanted to do about that; then, having made a decision, raised her glass.

“One more for the road?”

“Sure.” He went to stand, but she waved him down.

“I can buy my own round.”

“Sorry.”



He was regarding her, curiously, when she put down their refilled glasses, aware the mood had changed but not quite sure into what.

“So,” she asked, matter of factly. “What’s your opinion of a little hunter-on-hunter R’n’R?”

He sat back, slightly, at that, and took so long to answer that she thought he hadn’t understood her and interrupted just as he was opening his mouth to speak.

“Unless you’ve got a secret wife back home, or something. Or,” she glanced towards the exit. “You had a better offer?”

That he picked up right away.

“Jesus, that guy? No way. Trust me. Hell, no.”

“OK, protesting a little bit too much there…”

He took a breath, clearly realising that was exactly how it sounded.

“Sorry. It’s … let’s just say there’s some history there and it’s… complicated.” He paused, noticing that actually made it sound worse. “We just… I just really don’t like him, is all.”

“And yet I couldn’t help noticing he had his hand on your leg for pretty much the whole of the conversation…”

Cain sighed, looking almost sheepish.

“Honestly? It’s a long, boring story but I don’t even think he knows he’s doing it.”

Dionne hesitated, not entirely convinced, but then she wasn’t exactly proposing marriage here, she didn’t need his life story.

“So, that’s a yes, then?”

“You’re pretty direct, aren’t you?”

“That bother you?”

For the first time, he smiled properly, a slow, lazy grin that creased the corners of those green eyes and transformed that face into a much more dangerous proposition.

“No, direct is good. I’m a big fan of direct.”

She sat back and nodded, relaxed now, and noticing that smile was starting to do things to her insides that were telling her she’d made a good decision. She felt her own mouth curve in response.

“I figure any man who can’t handle a woman being direct about sex isn’t a man I want to be having sex with. Plus, you know what this life is like, not a whole lot of LOLs, gotta grab ‘em while you can.”

“Can’t argue with that, though I have to tell you that if ‘LOLs’ are something all the cool kids are doing these days, you might have to explain what they are to me first.”

She laughed at that, until she realised he was serious.

“You know they have this thing called the internet now, right?”

He pulled a face.

“Don’t remind me.”

Then a thought occurred to her, and she frowned. He saw her hesitation, and misread it.

“You… know I’m OK with the scars, right?” he ventured, which was awfully nice of him but exactly the worst thing to say.

“Gee, thanks, since I can tell you’re a block of unmarked marble under there yourself. I’m perfectly OK with the scars, thank you,” she scowled, then softened at his expression, which was that of a man who had a lifetime’s experience of saying the wrong thing to women. “No, it’s just… OK, look. There’s the teensiest catch.”

***

Well, this was certainly a first. In a very, very, very long life, the one thing Cain had never done was Meet The Parents. There had, he recalled, been that fling with that princess who was technically under the same roof as her father, but since it was a castle, it’d been a very big roof and the fact that Cain had reached their liaisons by climbing through a window on the second storey meant that he avoided any awkward parental encounters, though if he never again had to climb up another rope made of human hair, that would still be too soon. So the warning that Dionne was not only currently staying with her mother, but that said mother had, since her injury, taken to dozing on the sofa and so might well be awake when they got back, was actually slightly perturbing. Cain found himself with an unprecedented urge to find a mirror and check he looked presentable.



Dionne had taken him to a part of town that had an air of gentrification about it, and he guessed that her parents’ residence there pre-dated such improvements. Cain had rarely met a hunter who came from money, and those who did were a very particular type, tending to be fond of expensive gadgets and their own voices, and with a sense of entitlement that occasionally made him want to side with the monsters. Dionne clearly hadn’t been dragged up by wolves – and he knew that, as he’d met people who actually had been – but nothing about her said ‘spoiled’. So he was unsurprised when she led him up several flights of stone steps and unlocked the door of the tenement flat, revealing a tidy, comfortably furnished interior that spoke of possessions long loved, not cash thrown around.

“If you say one thing about me being a hunter and living with my mum, I swear I will shove you down those stairs,” she muttered darkly, but Cain just shrugged. He was the last person in the world who would comment about families. Then he noticed she was zipping up her jacket.

“You’re putting on clothes to come inside?”

Now she did look embarrassed. She gestured down to the t-shirt.

“Mum disapproves of swearing. C’mon in.”



“So, love, who’s this then?”

Cain had never been a teenage boy – one advantage of being an angel was avoiding puberty – but, standing in the living room while being scrutinised by a steely-eyed elderly woman, he had an insight into how they must feel, and wondered how the human race had ever managed to reproduce at all. The woman propped up on the sofa in her nightdress was a grey haired, slightly more lined and comfortably upholstered version of her daughter, the resemblance made more striking by the fact that the old woman shared Dionne’s look of taking no crap from anyone, which was all the more impressive coming from a little old lady in a flowered cotton nightie with one leg in a plaster cast. Cain wondered if hunting ran in the family. Dionne, however, seemed unfazed and leaned down to give her mother a gentle hug.

“He’s called Cain, Mum, and you should be in bed,” she said, her voice taking on a new softness.

“Pff! I can’t get to sleep, can’t get comfy. Might as well stay out here and watch the telly. I’d kill for a cup of tea, though.”

Dionne nodded, and headed off to the kitchen, touching Cain’s arm lightly as she passed. He stood, frozen, not sure if it was better manners to follow her, or to stay here.

“Friend of Dionne’s, then?” her mother asked.

“Um, yes, friend from work, Mrs…” he frowned, realising he had no idea what Dionne’s second name was, which rather put paid to that lie. There was a long, awkward pause then he tried again. “I’m, uh, new in town and Dionne very kindly said I could stay.”

The woman raised an eyebrow at this, her scepticism palpable, and Cain tried desperately to think of something to say to fill the expanding silence. Then, mercifully, after what seemed a very long time, Dionne reappeared behind him with a mug of tea, which she went to place on the arm of the sofa.

“For God’s sake, Cain,” she laughed. “I’m a 46 year old woman and I’ve never mentioned your name in my life before. She knows why you’re here.”

Dionne’s mother chuckled at that, too. Cain hadn’t, until now, actually realised he was physically capable of blushing, so at least that was one age-old physiological mystery solved.

“Thanks, love,” the old lady kissed her daughter’s cheek as she leaned down, though managing to keep Cain in her gaze, somehow wordlessly yet eloquently managing to suggest that should he abuse her daughter’s hospitality in any way, broken leg or not she would track him down and beat him to death with her crutch. Cain couldn’t hide his relief when Dionne took his wrist and pulled him away to the kitchen.



“Your mom wasn’t in the life, was she?” he asked, as Dionne rooted through a few cupboards until she had secured both a bottle of single malt and a couple of glasses.

“Mum? God, no,” she laughed. “She was a primary school teacher.”

“Right. Guess that’s almost the same thing.”

He drained his drink in one mouthful and gratefully accepted a refill. They were both leaning against the kitchen worktops, more relaxed now, and Cain realised it had been a long time since he’d just been this companionable with someone. He’d forgotten how nice it could be.

“Does she know what you do?”

“She thinks I sell medical supplies for a pharmaceutical company over in Chicago.”

He nodded to the scars.

“So how’d you explain those?”

“Nasty mugging when I was out volunteering for Homes for Humanity after Katrina.”

“Whereas…?”

“Loup-garou attacked me. It was in New Orleans, though – you know how it is, natural disasters tend to bring out the beasties, their world gets shaken up, too. Vicious little fucker, but I took it down.”

“I’m impressed.”

She grinned, a real warmth to her expression now.

“I can occasionally be impressive.”

He felt his own smile widen at that.

“So if it wasn’t the tragic death of a parent and it wasn’t a loup-garou attack, how did you get started? Not many teachers’ kids become hunters, that I’ve seen.”

She shrugged, took another drink, topped up their glasses.

“I did VSO after college…” seeing his blank look, she explained. “Overseas voluntary work. They send you to some pretty desperate places… and we both know those kinds of places attract more than just aid workers.”

He saw her expression darken with a memory.

“Most people don’t let themselves notice,” he said. “Or if they do, they come back, forget it ever happened.”

Another tight shrug.

“Not how I was brought up. Look around this city, Cain – you see how white it is, still? Imagine it 40 years ago. You think there were a lot of black teachers in Scotland when my mum started out? Lots of black kids in my school? My parents taught me to stand up to bullies and never let anyone stand in the way of doing what you think is right. I never grew out of the habit.”

He raised his glass to her, and smiled.

“Like I said, impressed.”

She turned away, slightly, for a moment, to hide just how pleased she was by that. Turning back, she nodded towards his own scars.

“So do I get the origin story, too?”

It was his turn to shrug.

“I meet a lot of people. Most of them don’t like me.”

“I find that hard to believe, what with you being so open and friendly and forthcoming and all.”

He laughed at that, and, putting down his drink, moved in a little closer, one hand resting lightly on her hip as the other took the glass from her hand and put it on the countertop.

“I can be friendly when the company deserves it,” he grinned, which seemed a pretty good line to kiss her on. Luckily, she seemed to agree.



Cain was sitting by the window, drink in hand, looking out at the rainy Edinburgh night. Even a creature as ill-versed in popular culture as he was recognised that to an observer he must look like a cliché, and that all he was missing as a blinking neon sign outside his window, and some mellow saxophone music playing in the background. Still, he was awake, and restless, and since his two alternatives were risking the old lady in the living room or climbing out the window, he’d have to be content to sit and embody the stereotype.

Dionne lay on the bed, her breathing soft and regular, sleeping off what had turned out to be a thoroughly enjoyable workout. Not exactly romantic, he knew, but Cain had no problem with the idea of sex as recreation: two people who liked one another enough to be naked enjoying one of nature’s least complicated pleasures. And he did genuinely like Dionne – she was clearly smart, took no shit and had a sense of humour about herself, the latter being a fairly rare trait in a hunter, and one where Cain admitted he probably fell a little short himself. She had challenged him to a battle of the scars as they disrobed, and the loup-garou scar had been truly impressive – a jagged line that transected her body diagonally from throat to hip, her skin peppered with a smaller marks, evidence of a life on the edge.

“Fucking hell!” she had exclaimed, though, when she realised just how comprehensively he had her beaten on that score. She stared, astonished, at the network of pale lines that adorned him, running curious fingers down the two long, vivid gashes that ran parallel down his back from shoulder to waist. “How are you even still alive?”

Since he didn’t have an answer that he wanted to share, he applied himself to distracting her from the question, which managed to keep both of them occupied for a pleasurable amount of time. Now, though, his mood had soured, and it was the curse of his constitution that he didn’t need sleep unless he was injured, and almost a whole bottle of scotch had done little to blur his thoughts.



He missed Cass, for one thing, though he felt almost sacrilegious bringing her to mind when he was so fresh from another woman’s arms. The wound of her absence had been made raw again by even the brief sighting of Katie and Medea, and then that fucking prick vampire had shown up, which was always guaranteed to ruin his night. Besides, Laclos’ presence made him uneasy for another reason, one he found himself reluctant to examine. They had parted on relatively amicable terms, it was true; a truce that to the casual observer might even look like friendship of a sort. Cain was indebted to the vampire in a way that he wasn’t happy about, since they had twice teamed up now to save Cass’s life, and he was a man who took such obligations seriously. But there remained an air of unfinished business between them, of inevitable conflict only temporarily postponed. Much of this was about Cass, of course, because the vampire made no secret of his affection for her, and Cain had only had to see Cass’s reaction to Laclos’ attentions to realise he was a very real contender to usurp Cain’s place in her heart. But it was more than that. The vampire presented a threat to Cain that Laclos himself didn’t even realise, made all the more dangerous by his ignorance, since he was struggling to control something he didn’t understand.

Young vampires never picked up on Cain’s nature – too overwhelmed by their own transformation and the hot rush of humanity around them – but older vampires sometimes did, something inside them responding to the ancient power that thrummed through Cain’s blood. They often struggled to process their own reactions, not least because Cain usually killed them before they could figure it out, and Laclos was having the same problem. Clearly the vampire was drawn to him, though so far this had mainly manifested itself in an intensifying of Laclos’ usual brand of physical inappropriateness. This seemed born of a genuine sexual attraction to Cain which the angel, having failed entirely to pick up any of humanity’s hang-ups about gender or sexuality, wasn’t remotely bothered by, combined with an equally strong enjoyment of trying to wind him up, which did annoy Cain, especially since it generally worked. But much of this behaviour was due to Laclos, unused to encountering Cain’s kind, misreading his own reaction, which was a bone-deep hunger no human could ever provoke or satisfy, and which even the vampire’s own immortal body struggled to comprehend. Cain knew Dionne was sceptical at his lack of annoyance at Laclos’ attentions, but how did he explain to her that he didn’t want the vampire noticing his own actions, lest he start analysing them too closely?



Laclos might now be reacting to his proximity so instinctively he barely realised, but let him keep mis-reading his own motives. Cain hadn’t known the vampire long, but he recognised he had strong views on the importance of consent in sexual relationships, so his attentions on that front would never progress beyond harmless, if heavy-handed, flirtation. Had Laclos realised what he was feeling was actually more hunger for blood – and recognised the nature of the man who was arousing it – he might well turn out to have less rigid views on the importance of consensual feeding, and Cain wanted to avoid a scenario where that theory was put to the test. Normally the angel would remove such a potential threat decisively, no matter what the accepted ground rules of the city demanded, but Cass’s affection for the vampire complicated matters, as did the fact that, for all his strength, Cain wasn’t invulnerable, and he was still recovering: if the 1,000 year old vampire went blood crazy and came at him, Cain wasn’t entirely convinced he would be able to fight him off.

He heard a sound behind him, and Dionne chuckled, softly.

“You know you have the whole brooding and soulful thing off pat, right? Though I’m guessing you’ve been told that a few times already.”

He turned to face her as she spoke. She was propped up on one elbow, smiling, the sheet having fallen to her waist. He liked that there was no false modesty there, no shyness, just a woman at ease with a body that had seen her through a lot of wars. Plus, he really enjoyed the view.

“It has been said,” he admitted, with a rueful smile. “Usually not as a compliment.”

She laughed at that.

“Yeah, I never did meet a male hunter who didn’t like a good brood. Must be something in the handbook that they don’t give out to us girls. You come up with any startling or helpful revelations?”

“No, I think I just drank all of your whisky.”

“It’s Scotland, there’s always more. But seeing as we have to go out in a couple of hours, and after this we’ll probably never see one another again, you really want to spend your time staring moodily out of the window?”

She pulled the sheet lower, exponentially improving the view. Cain felt himself smile, and had to concede she made an excellent point.





Chapter 12




Something, Dionne realised, wasn’t quite right with this picture, and it wasn’t just all the dead bodies. She was pottering around the kitchen, preparing food for her mother to heat up later; luckily her mum was still a little mobile, but Dionne didn’t want her standing around for long periods. Besides, the methodical, thought-free preparation of dishes she’d cooked for years freed up her brain to think of other things, like so many pots simmering on the stove.



For a start, there was definitely something odd about the hunter. He’d taken off early, seemingly unfazed by a night that had left her so exhausted she’d had to drag herself out of bed and mainline two cups of strong coffee before she could even think about doing anything. True, she now felt great – loose limbed and relaxed in the way that only good sex can deliver, the pleasant almost-soreness of an out of practice body given a very thorough workout, even if the twinge in her hip when she stood still too long was an unpleasant reminder that she wasn’t as young as she used to be, and possibly too old to be testing her stamina against a man who looked to be a good decade younger than she was. She pushed that thought aside, hastily, as it wasn’t one she wanted to dwell on: she didn’t know a lot of old hunters, and the future was starting to feel awfully near.



Still, at least this one didn’t seem to be a total cock, and youth and being in great shape didn’t make him as arrogant as he could have been. Like most hunters, Dionne had an abysmal relationship track record, so had developed a practical approach to meeting her physical needs; but since a Canadian tracker with whom she’d had a mutually respectful ‘friends with benefits’ relationship had met a messy end to a pack of werewolves in the tundra a couple of years ago, she’d found the periods of celibacy between encounters stretching longer and longer. Civilians mostly bored her, and all too often she encountered the double standard that a male hunter who just wanted to get laid was a stud, but if she hooked up with someone for the night, she was a slutty tramp who got into the life to meet blokes. Plus, since most hunters she met were younger than her, it was starting to make her feel a bit like Joan Collins, without the make up. So, yes, grateful she might be for some no strings, non-judgemental sex with a man who knew what he was doing between the sheets – and in the shower, and up against the bedroom door, she reminded herself, a pleasant surge of heat between her legs as she mentally reviewed the evening’s highlights – but it hadn’t made her stupid, and something about Cain didn’t add up.

For a start, what the hell was going on with that vampire? Cain had shrugged off the question when she raised it again, seeing that the vampire’s grip on Cain’s leg hadn’t been a gentle pat of affection, but had left bruises on flesh that looked like it could take a lot of damage without any mark: all without Cain showing a flicker of reaction.

“He’s an arsehole, but I sort of owe him.”

Which could have been convincing had the vampire’s behaviour not been equally strange. He might have looked at Dionne like he could eat her up with a spoon – a not entirely unpleasant look to be on the receiving end of, she admitted; a face like that was capable of giving a woman Very Bad Thoughts – but his gaze kept drifting back to Cain, as if he couldn’t stop himself. She’d only seen a vampire look like that once before, and that had been in the presence of a bleeding open wound. It might, of course, be that she was reading too much into what was just a past sexual relationship – Cain wouldn’t be the first hunter to be seduced by the dark side and fall in with the things that he was supposed to be hunting – but she was convinced there was more too it. Something about Cain elicited that almost-compelled response from the vampire, and she was curious to know just exactly what that was.

“Fuck!” she cursed, as that simmering thought bubbled over into another. Then, out of habit, she called out, “Sorry, Mum!”

But inside she was still swearing: because she realised what they’d missed all along.





Chapter 13




No creature got to Laclos’ age without having the occasional bad night, but the vampire was starting to find this whole trip exceptionally trying. Not least because he was 1,000 years old, obscenely rich, distractingly handsome and possessed of more power than most people could ever imagine, and yet he was currently standing on a street corner handing out fliers dressed in a Dracula costume that he was sure contained an unreasonable amount of polyester. People were ignoring him! Ignoring him. Even in life, Laclos had not been a man who was ignored. Now he was sullenly hovering at the entrance to Princes Street Park, just opposite Waverley Station, which was supposedly prime real estate for those touting their shows, and he might as well have been invisible. The park was a long expanse of green that ran along one side of Princes Street and famously housed the towering Scott Monument, a large, imposing monument to a man who, Laclos thought bitterly, really didn’t deserve such a phallic memorial. Such pedestrian lack of interest was possibly not completely surprising, since the fliers he was handing out seemed to be for a show called Sucka!, in which the legend of Van Helsing was relocated to 1970s Harlem and inexplicably set to music, an idea which sounded so terrible Laclos was tempted to crash the venue and graphically remind people that a real vampire killing spree was rarely accompanied by music. (There had been that time in Bayreuth, he remembered, fondly, but then Wagner and blood frenzy went quite well together and he felt the composer might secretly have approved). He looked almost wistfully at the juggler several feet away from him, idly pondering how much his night would improve if he could steal one of those knives and cut off his own head. Of course, it was the bloody hunter’s fault.



As with most disastrous endeavours, travelling up to Edinburgh had seemed, at the time, like a good idea. Cassandra had told him, in an idle moment, that Katie and Medea were visiting, so the city had been fresh on his mind when he first picked up murmurs of a rogue vampire in Scotland. A little investigation – because a vampire like Laclos had contacts everywhere – had led to this, and it seemed like an ideal opportunity to temporarily escape a city that was starting to feel claustrophobic. Not only was he frustrated by Cassandra’s recalcitrance – honestly, he was delightful, why on earth was she resisting him? – but everywhere he turned he was faced by the memory of betrayal, and the knowledge that the fact he had survived an attempted coup was in large part due to the man who continued to squat so stubbornly in Cassandra’s affections. Then there was the creeping realisation that every time he saw the hunter, he could feel himself going a little more insane.

It wouldn’t have been so bad if Laclos could understand just why Cain had such an effect on him. Cain was a very attractive man, that was true, but Laclos had no shortage of very attractive men and women in his life, and on the very rare occasions when his interest was not reciprocated, he was happy enough to turn his attention elsewhere. Even as a young vampire, Laclos had eschewed compulsion: while not a man who would admit to being ethical, he was happy to admit to being egotistical, and saw little point in spending time with a lover who wasn’t genuinely keen to be there. Besides, if the hunter wasn’t fodder for seduction, he could be a plentiful source of entertainment: Laclos was happy to amuse himself finding ways to annoy the humourless prig. Laclos had a fondness for compromising others’ personal space – it was a useful tool in romance, since once someone got used to allowing you inside the perimeter of what was normally acceptable proximity, other intimacies seemed almost inevitable, but equally it was a useful way of unnerving his adversaries. It particularly worked with hunters, who tended on the whole to be a rather macho bunch whose masculinity was fairly easily threatened by an attractive man flirting with them. So in a way, Laclos was actually quite impressed by how resolutely unflustered Cain was by his attentions, the occasional violent flare-up aside, which he considered an occupational hazard when dealing with his type.

Yet something about the hunter affected him in a way he couldn’t control and he found himself struggling to maintain his composure in his company. He had guessed Cain wasn’t entirely human, but there were many things in the world that were not, and nothing had ever caused such a surge in his appetite, nor had he heard of anything that affected vampires in that way. He was relatively sure that his place in Cassandra’s affections kept him safe from an unwarranted attack at Cain’s hands, but he was worried that he would at some future time emerge from whatever blood-coloured fugue the hunter induced in him with his fangs at the man’s throat, a provocation which could justifiably be considered fatal.



He’d noticed it the last time. He and the hunter had worked a case together, and though they had spent barely a few hours together – albeit many of them in a confined space – on Cain’s departure Laclos had plunged into a week-long sex and blood binge that was extreme even by his own bloated standards of indulgence. That memory had resurfaced last night, as he stood in the shower of an expensive hotel room, washing the smell of sex and blood from his skin. (Laclos was against using his powers on lovers, but had no compunction compelling hotel receptionists to free up rooms that were long-term booked but not presently occupied. He liked the finer things in life, and was brazen in how he obtained them.) He’d looked over at the couple who dozed, exhausted, on the king-sized bed, and for the briefest moment thought, why ever not? The risks would be minimal: he’d made sure to avoid the hotel CCTV cameras and had been careful to leave the club separately from his targets for the sake of discretion. It wasn’t hard for a man of Laclos’ charm to persuade people to indulge his particular kink, and they had been enjoyable and accommodating, true, but was that enough to save them? Why not, just this once, indulge, and leave them drained and dry, a problem for whatever millionaire businessman kept this room on retainer to use for his trysts? But even as he thought that, Laclos wondered if part of his dilemma was not the hunter at all, but that their encounter, all those months back, had made Laclos realise that he had been too safe, too long, and become as soft as those he once mocked; an easy target for usurpation, complacent and overconfident. Cain had brought danger back into his life, and Laclos was only now realising how much he had missed it. He had stood in the hotel shower for a long time, head bowed, trembling with need, and for the first time in over a century he had seriously considered taking a life simply because he wanted to, simply because he could. And he knew, in a way that he couldn’t quite articulate, that seeing Cain again was the reason.

Laclos felt his fangs itch at the memory, annoyed. He was used to being the one who inspired such madness, not the one who was afflicted with it. And to suffer it at the hands of an ill-tempered, badly dressed oaf with a body like a patchwork quilt was ignominy itself. With an internal sigh, he cast another wistful look at the juggler. Really, those knives were looking more appealing by the minute.



So engrossed was Laclos in his grievances that he failed to notice that the architect of one of them was approaching, and it was only when the full sensory onslaught that was Cain was standing right next to him that he realised. He started, his face struggling to hide the fact that the hunter had managed to sneak up on him without even trying – God, he must be distracted – but also just how immediately he felt his appetite sharpen, despite the generous meal of only a few hours before. He clearly didn’t hide it as well as he wanted to, though, as Cain took one look at him and moved away, realising that with a vampire’s senses Laclos could hear him whisper if he was a couple of feet away, so there was no reason for proximity.

“You find out anything?” Cain asked.

“Only that I would prefer experimental surgery at the point of a stake to experimental drama, and that actors remain as tedious and self-obsessed as they have been for centuries.”

“Guess you fit right in, then.”

Laclos chose to ignore that.

“However, I have heard tales of a higher than usual level of unreliability this year. Performers dropping out of shows, people taking money and then failing to turn up. Not enough, perhaps, to cause a scandal, but enough to suggest that our vampire – if indeed vampire he is – is not just targeting tourists.”

“Or maybe a bunch of flaky actors got drunk, or had better offers.”

“Also possible, I concede.”

Cain sighed, heavily.

“Am I the only one who thinks this is a lot harder than it should be?”

It was such a genuine question it caught Laclos by surprise, and he took a moment to consider his answer.

“I agree, it is frustrating, but we are all in a city that is no longer familiar to us, and constrained by the very status quo we are seeking to protect. I am guessing, hunter, that were we not in Britain your investigative methods would not be as… civilised, nor would your lovely companion’s.”

“And yours?”

Laclos looked bemused.

“Were we not in a territory I have a personal interest in, why would I care that a vampire was killing people? Thousands of people are murdered every day. Provided their killer doesn’t leave a trail that leads to my kind, I frankly don’t care if that total rises slightly.” He saw Cain’s disapproving expression, and smiled. “Nor, I suspect, do you. It is one thing to want to hunt a wolf, it is another thing entirely to want to protect the sheep.”

Cain didn’t say anything for a moment – Laclos suspected he had hit a nerve, which pleased him – then turned away, gruffly.

“C’mon, I said we’d meet Dionne in the pub.”

“Ah, yes,” Laclos followed him. “I’m pleased to see you are not so heartbroken over Cassandra’s abandonment that you were unable to find solace elsewhere.” Cain’s back stiffened, slightly. “Before you deny it, do remember who you’re talking to. I can smell her all over you.”

Cain stopped walking and turned around, his voice tight with anger.

“You want to compare notes over how we’re distracting ourselves from Cass, vampire? Bet your number is higher than mine.”

Laclos shrugged, his tone pleasant.

“Any time you wish an insight into my sexual activities, you are more than welcome to observe them first hand. But why do you assume that I need to distract myself from Cassandra? How do you not know that your departure hasn’t driven her straight into my arms?”

He expected a reaction at that – his posture shifted slightly, anticipating a blow – predicting either full-on jealous rage or at least the all-too-familiar look Cain took on when he was trying not to hit someone. Instead, Cain actually laughed, which was really quite infuriating, and slapped the vampire so hard on the shoulder he felt his bones jar.

“C’mon, I feel so sorry for you in that get-up I might even buy you a drink.”





Chapter 14




“Well, this is a delightful place,” Laclos murmured, as they entered the pub. “I see you continue to frequent only the most upscale of establishments.”

Cain ignored both the comment and the fact that Laclos had felt the need to lean in quite so close to deliver it, though undoubtedly there was something unnerving about a vampire whispering in your ear, since that meant he was awfully close to your throat. Then both men clattered to an undignified halt as their entrance into the pub resulted in the landlord yelling at them.

“Oi! Bugger off! None of your sort in here!”

They froze, baffled, though Laclos didn’t see fit to remove his hand from where it rested, lightly, on Cain’s shoulder. Cain sighed, inwardly – if this was another homophobic thing, he wasn’t going to be best pleased. As an angel indifferent to human notions of sexuality and a professional grump who didn’t care about strangers’ opinions, Cain wasn’t at all bothered if Laclos’ admittedly dramatic beauty and overly grabby nature led people to form the wrong impression of their relationship, but it chagrined him to be put in a position, yet again, where he had to defend the vampire’s honour. But before he had a chance to formulate that thought into action, Dionne was at their side, mugging apologetically at the man behind the bar.

“Sorry! Sorry! He won’t do anything, I promise!” she called out, confusing them further. She snatched the fliers from Laclos’ hand and made a great show of shoving them into her bag.

“This is a non-festival pub,” she hissed, hurriedly shooing them towards a table at the back where drinks were waiting for them, aware that the landlord was watching them suspiciously, lest Laclos did something that could be construed as entertainment. Once they were safely seated, she gave a friendly wave to the marginally mollified barman before she spoke.

“I think I know what’s happening. I think I know why we’re wrong.”



Neither man looked happy with her theory, but neither interrupted her as she explained her reasoning. Eventually, seeing she was done, Cain sat back, slowly.

“So you’re saying this is more about the victims than the killer?”

“I just think there are too many coincidences to overlook. We’ve all been running around trying to track a rogue vampire, working on the assumption he’s somehow hiding in plain sight with the Fringe shows, killing people who are just unlucky enough not to know their way around the city and to stumble into his way – that’s why he’s hitting actors and tourists. But look – really look – at the victim pattern.” She paused, allowing either of them to leap in with any salient information they had managed to gather earlier then nodding in satisfaction when they didn’t. “Obviously some of this is guesswork since we don’t know if all of these were our guy, but I had a friend in the police pull some files on suspicious deaths. There were four with a question mark over them last year plus a half dozen missing persons. Last year: Mark Allen, who did ghost walks dressed in ‘period’ costume, found dead at the bottom of a flight of stone steps, massive blood loss due to being impaled on the railings at the bottom. Keisha Malloy played a zombie in…” She groaned, looking down at her notes. “Stalking Dead, the musical. Body found decomposing in a skip, looking aptly fitted for her role. Cause of death clearly foul play but by the time they found her, couldn’t establish a clear MO. Zac Hammersley, played a werewolf called Six Pack in, um, a Twilight parody called Ella Duck and the Pretty Boys. Fell out of the window in the tenement he was staying in…”

Cain scowled.

“Don’t tell me, onto conveniently placed railings down below?”

“Bled out onto the pavement, was there all night before anyone found him. I mean, I know there are a lot of railings in this city, but still… Then there was…” She again consulted the notepad in her hand. “Trent Pauley, a vampire, hit by a bus, which would just be another dumb tourist not watching out for traffic, except witnesses said he looked like he was being chased by someone.”

“And this year?”

“Another zombie reported AWOL, and the girl we found played a bride of Dracula in a play called Stake! …The musical.”

Laclos sighed.

“Has anyone considered we should be investigating the critics? And, possibly, applauding their actions, not seeking to prevent them?” he offered.

“I hate to agree, but maybe we’re just looking at someone who doesn’t like actors,” Cain said. Dionne frowned.

“Or maybe he doesn’t realise they’re actors.”

It took a moment for that to sink in, and when it did, Cain wasn’t happy.

“Shit,” he said, sitting back. Laclos looked from Dionne to Cain, aware that he was missing something.

“So… if he isn’t a vampire, then what is he?”

This time it was Cain and Dionne who spoke in unison.

“He’s a hunter.”

Laclos stared at them both.

“So… you’re saying you suspect there’s a rogue hunter in town killing people who are dressing up like Others? Why on earth would anyone do that?” He cast a withering look at Cain. “Even by your sociopathic standards, that seems rather… extreme.”

Dionne was the one who answered.

“Could be any number of reasons. Look, all of us had the idea to check out the shows, see if he was drawn to them, either as punter or performer, because all vampires like drama, right? And we weren’t wrong, I don’t think – just not focused properly. Maybe the killer really is a vampire – got turned and abandoned by a careless sire, wouldn’t be the first time, and that would explain why you picked up a scent. Or maybe he’s just flipped out. Hunters tend not to be the most stable members of society at the best of times,” she ignored Laclos’ pointed look at Cain. “Could be he can’t tell the difference between dress-up and real anymore, or he thinks that by promoting the supernatural, they’re somehow… sanitising it, or in league with the monsters or something. You hear plenty of stories. Guy in Kansas shot up a Halloween party a couple of years ago, when he was arrested, told police he was a hunter and the party had been ‘infiltrated’. They go back even earlier and further afield – hell,” she looked at Cain. “You must have heard the really famous one, back in the 1900s a hunter wiped out a whole village in Romania because he flipped and thought they’d all been possessed by demons.”

“No, that was different, they really were…” Cain started, then thought better of it and decided his drink was more interesting. Laclos and Dionne exchanged looks, and there was a long pause, before she continued talking.

“OK, then. But what I’m saying is it’s not unheard of for the line to start to blur. To either stop differentiating, or get evangelical and decide all those teenage girls swooning after Edward Cullen are making it too easy for the bad guys to score.” She looked at Laclos. “You honestly telling me you haven’t noticed a stream of willing donors these days?”

He looked offended.

“Darling, look at me. I have always been a magnet for the curious. But, yes, I concede that I have noticed certain enterprises catering to the Other community are thriving more than they would have in previous years, and not everyone approves of such ventures.” Which gave rise to another exchange of looks between the two men. Dionne gave a slight huff of disapproval, annoyed that there seemed to be an entire conversation going on – again – which she wasn’t party to. Laclos noticed her displeasure and turned the full wattage of that smile back to her.

“That would explain why two experienced hunters and someone with my impeccable connections have as yet failed to unearth the least bit of evidence as to our culprit, but does it not in fact make our job harder? Finding a vampire in a city of humans is difficult, finding another human becomes exponentially so. Unless you have a handy Hunter Yellow Pages you can check and see if anyone has failed to turn up for work?”

Dionne smiled, and Laclos was unnerved to notice that she bore an uncanny resemblance to how Cain looked whenever he was about to say something he knew the vampire wouldn’t like. It must be a hunter thing.

“Well,” she said, grinning. “Lucky for us we have bait.”

“Bait?” Laclos queried. Then he looked down at his outfit: the ridiculous shirt, the velvet jacket, the cape. He felt his usual loquaciousness desert him.

“Fuck,” he muttered.





Chapter 15




As it turned out, however, Laclos was quite taken with the plan, and not just because Cain was so vehemently opposed to it.

“Do you have any idea how many ways this could go wrong?” he demanded, furiously. “And that’s not even to say it’ll work. Do you know how much supernatural themed crap is in this festival? How can you be sure we’ll get the killer’s attention?”

“Come, hunter,” Laclos sighed. “It’s a splendid idea. I am afraid you will just have to accept that your lovely companion is the brains in this particular pairing and allow her to put her plan into action.”

“And you’re just… what? Going to stand there and hope he notices?”

Dionne interrupted.

“He’s a vampire, Cain. I’m sure he has some tricks up that frilly-cuffed sleeve of his.”

“None that I am at liberty to use with impunity on humans, I would have thought,” Laclos demurred. Dionne threw a sharp glance at Cain, who looked unhappy, but clearly got the message.

“I’ll get the next round in,” he scowled. “I think I need another drink. Or five.”

Dionne watched him go, then turned back to Laclos with a smile.

“So, when you don’t have a big grumpy hunter looking over your shoulder, I imagine you do use those tricks a lot more.”

Laclos laughed, delighted, clapping his hands together with undisguised glee.

“I believe, then, that settles it. We really are putting on the show right here!”



“Honestly, I have slept with a vast number of actors and actresses over the centuries, and they are always complaining about how difficult it is to get a production together, when really, it’s remarkably easy.”

Laclos was standing in a closet-sized space that was laughingly labelled a dressing room, examining his reflection in the mirror and trying not to notice that the set-up forced him into uncomfortable proximity to Cain. The hunter, who had had some experience with actresses himself, said nothing, but Dionne laughed.

“I expect it’s a little easier when you can just compel everyone to do what you want.”

“Well, yes, that does help,” Laclos conceded. And it had, actually, been fairly straightforward. Find a reasonably sized venue booked for a midnight show – in this case, a stand-up comic with a reputation for being edgy – and compel him and everyone involved in the show to let Laclos take his place; a quick wander around the streets with Laclos compelling anyone that came near enough to want to see it, to ensure a full house and that, hopefully, word would get out of the ‘realistic’ vampire show that was on offer. True, anyone turning up with the expectation of seeing a foul-mouthed Northerner slagging off the government and making jokes about shagging female celebrities would be surprised, but Laclos had assured a concerned Dionne that they would not be disappointed.



There was a knock at the door and a slightly dazed looking stage manager opened the door and popped his head round.

“Five minutes!” he said. “It’s rammed out there tonight, first time this year.” He looked at Laclos, trying to figure out what was bothering him, then shook his head as if trying to clear a fog and retreated.

“You do have some idea of what you’ll do out there, right? He needs to see you as a worthy target.” Dionne was fretting now – this might have been her idea, but what had seemed clever in the pub seemed borderline insane now, and it didn’t help that Cain was clearly so against the whole thing. But, while they hadn’t outlined anything so commonplace as a plan, she hoped that a vampire as charismatic as Laclos could hold the attention of a room: he seemed like he would be a good raconteur, and they had, after all, billed it as ‘An Audience with a Vampire’ – Laclos dismissing the similarity to a certain work of fiction with an airy wave of his hand. “Oh, even if she ever finds out, she won’t mind,” he said, and Dionne thought it was best to just let that go.

They followed Laclos – who, for some reason she couldn’t fathom, was now barefoot – to the wings, watching the nervous stage manager announce to a restless audience that there had been a change to the programme, and hearing a worrying amount of moans and groans, a few drunken protests. Maybe this really was a terrible idea.

“Hopefully at least some of them will be too drunk to leave,” she muttered. “I mean, it’s not like you can compel the whole audience.” Laclos turned to her with a smile.

“Don’t worry, my dear. I have more than just a vampire’s tricks up my sleeve.”



Being blessed with a vampire’s senses, Laclos quite clearly heard the audience reaction as he strolled out from the wings and took his place in the spotlight, including a few muttered, ‘Is this a fucking joke?’ and the inevitable ‘Jesus, he looks like a twat.’ Because, of course, he did look like a total imbecile, and swirling the cape as he walked didn’t help, either, but he was finding that now he’d started with it, it was becoming a hard habit to break. But something about the way he stood there in the centre of the stage, statue still and as if an audience was his natural birthright, sent a ripple through the crowd; a murmur that was part anticipation, part unease, and when he spoke his voice was a low, soft rumble that seemed to carry across the room but be a whisper in every ear.

“So,” he began, holding out his hands, palms up, a gesture of both surrender and invitation. “You have come to hear the truth about vampires.”

The room had fallen silent, even the cynical muttering dying out.

“To examine the truth, you must, of course, look beyond the clichés.” He unclasped the cape at his throat and let it puddle on the floor at his bare feet. “Strip away the illusions.” He shucked off the jacket smoothly, the merest murmur of cloth.

“We must free ourselves of the trappings of history.” Long, slender fingers worked at the buttons of his shirt, peeling it open to reveal a chest that seemed carved of pure marble, almost dazzling in the spotlight. It fell to the ground in a small hiss of silk that was echoed by a collective intake of breath in the darkness. Laclos smiled, an oddly private smile that felt personal to everyone in the room.

“Remove the… restraints of fiction.” The slither of leather on fabric as he undid his belt and slid it free was loud in the room, the sound of the zip of his flies slowly lowering tearing through the breathless silence. “To truly see the vampire, you must see us as we are… unadorned.” In one fluid, snake hipped movement he pulled his trousers down and stepped out of them, until he was standing, naked, his disguise discarded on the stage.

“Holy fuck!” Dionne gasped, which Laclos acknowledged with the tiniest quirk of his lips. Right at that moment, the vampire wasn’t the only one in the room not breathing: the very air seemed to have stilled. Then Laclos reached behind his head and untied the ribbon that held back his hair and shook the dark waves loose. Slowly, he held out his arms in the Christ-like pose that Cain had seen so often; then he threw back his head and laughed, basking in the collective, transfixed gaze of the dark. Then he ducked his head, before glancing up through long lashes, eyes gleaming, his smile wicked and inviting.

“Now, for the next part of the show I require a little assistance from the audience. Would any of you care to volunteer?”

There was a whoosh of air as 200 hands shot up at exactly the same moment.



Wide eyed and open mouthed, Dionne turned to Cain, who was probably the only person in the place who looked like he wanted to be somewhere else right now.

“Well,” she said, one hand fluttering girlishly at her chest in a most uncharacteristic gesture. She realised she was doing it and, embarrassed, stopped. “You have to admit he has flair.”



“My! That was invigorating!” Laclos burst off the stage, rapturous applause finally receding. Cain rolled his eyes, unimpressed.

“I think we could have done without the crowdsurfing finale.”

“Oh, don’t be such a spoilsport,” Laclos gave him a playful shove, which, to Cain’s ill-disguised alarm, actually pushed him back several inches. The vampire grinned, teeth reddened and lips bee-stung swollen. His skin was flushed, his body streaked with blood – what was the point of public feeding, after all, if one didn’t do so visibly? A little spillage was worth it for the dramatic effect. Dionne was staring, it taking a significant effort to keep her eyes on his face.

“I can’t believe we just staged a show that was basically an hour of a vampire feeding on people,” she cast a glance out at the audience, many of whom still seemed to be slightly stunned and were stumbling as they made their way to the exits. “I also can’t believe that the posh naked English guy wasn’t lynched by the drunk Scottish blokes in the audience. I feel sort of dirty.”

Never one who was able to resist a line, Laclos opened his mouth to reply to that but Cain shut him down with a glare. He wasn’t exactly thrilled to be this close to Laclos when he was so well-fed, concerned that so much human blood might make his own seem like a tempting way to round out the meal. He spoke to Dionne without taking his eyes off Laclos, even though he could feel how much the vampire was enjoying being the focus of both their gazes.

“They were all willing and he can’t cross infect people by multiple bitings. I mean, he could have done without the ego boost, but this was your idea. You can’t say he didn’t get their attention.”

“I’m worried a show like that will get everyone’s attention. The last thing I want is to single-handedly kick off the vampire apocalypse because we just proved they exist.”

Cain, who was rather in favour of a vampire apocalypse but knew it was frowned on by other hunters because of the inevitable collateral damage, said nothing. Besides, part of the reasoning behind a midnight show was that a good half of the audience would have been fairly intoxicated, so not exactly the most reliable of reporters. They wanted rumour, not evidence, and much as he hadn’t liked Laclos’ methods, he couldn’t deny they looked to be effective.

Laclos, too, appeared unconcerned, though this was possibly because he now seemed as drunk as much of his audience. He was swaying slightly and reached out to Cain to steady himself, only a slight twitch in Cain’s jaw indicating that he wasn’t happy that the vampire was basically using him as ballast to push against as he struggled to remain upright.

“There is nowhere better to hide than in the spotlight, my dear,” Laclos murmured, not seeming to notice that Cain neatly sidestepped him the minute he let him go. He reached out again, idly, and when his outstretched hand closed on empty air he looked down, puzzled, as if not sure what he had been reaching for. He stared at his fingers, for a moment, then seemed so snap back to himself, turning to Dionne with a broad smile.

“Now, let us head into the streets and see if my new-found notoriety has gathered the review we were aiming at…”

He turned to leave, stopped by her awkward cough.

“Yes?”

“Um, you might want to put on some clothes, first?”

“Ah, yes. Excellent suggestion.”



“So, do you have specific ideas on how you would like me to proceed?” Laclos was in the dressing room, examining himself in the mirror and apparently trying to decide how much blood he would wipe off and how much to leave for dramatic emphasis. Dionne leaned against the wobbly dressing table, but Cain had left the door open and elected to wait outside.

“Do what you normally do,” he answered. “Flounce around like a dickhead drawing attention to yourself and occasionally disappear down dark alleys. Pretend you’re still plugging the show, and don’t make yourself look too hard to kill.”

“I do like a challenge. I presume one or both of you will be at a convenient distance poised to leap to my defence at the key moment.”

Cain shrugged.

“Or, y’know, after.”

Laclos smiled, but his voice was cool.

“Ah, hunter, an addled human picking off an easy victim? Your presence is required to assure his safety, not mine – I assumed you were coming along to stop me killing him before you can discover his motives.” He took one long, easy stride that brought him inches away from Cain, and looked gratified at his slight flinch. “I suspect right at this moment I could even bring you down, hunter.” Then he leaned in closer, his mouth at the other man’s ear, careful to keep out of Dionne’s eyeline, his voice so low only that Cain could hear it. “Whatever you really are.”

Then, pulling away swiftly, he smiled at Dionne and slid past both of them, heading for the exit. She turned to Cain, looking about as thrilled as he felt.

“You want to let me in on that little exchange?”

“He likes winding me up. It’s nothing.”

She didn’t look very convinced.

“Look, you two have a past… hell, even a present, that’s not my business. But I don’t want to get caught in the middle of some… tiff or old score settling. There’s something I need to know here, respect me enough to tell me what it is.”

Cain hesitated. He liked Dionne, he really did, but she was still a human, and there were some things he wasn’t willing to share.

“It’s a stupid row over a girl. A woman,” he amended, hastily, rightly assuming Dionne would correct him otherwise. “We both liked the same woman, it caused a little friction. Plus, honestly, he really just enjoys getting on my nerves.”

Dionne didn’t look like she was buying that, but she could see nothing but sincerity in his expression. Eventually, realising no further explanation was forthcoming, she sighed.

“C’mon, then, let’s get this over with.”





Chapter 16




Laclos was realising he actually felt quite peculiar. He had gorged on enough blood to sate him several times over, but he also felt restless and, there was no other word that summed it up quite so succinctly, horny. He rarely drank from humans in a non-sexual context any more, and to so thoroughly satisfy one hunger without addressing another was disorienting. He had also, quite literally, mixed his drinks, the variety of blood a more potent cocktail than the equivalent amount from one donor would be, though no single donor could possibly have provided this evening’s level of nourishment. And underlying it all, nagging at him, was the presence of the hunter, an itch he couldn’t scratch.

Thinking of the hunter, he had no idea where either of them were, right at that moment. They’d split up to keep a loose circle of surveillance both on Laclos and the local area, to try and ensure that their focus on one plan didn’t preclude them preventing other people falling victim to a killer when their eye was off the ball. Still, Laclos was finding it increasingly tedious wandering around waiting to be murdered, when he really could be doing better, more naked things.

“Ah, here I am,” he sing-songed, annoyed now at the ridiculousness of the plan, as if he could ever be such a mundane thing as bait. “An evil creature of the night, possibly even now planning my next victim! Or,” he added, his tone desultory, “A helpless thespian pretending to be an evil creature of the night! Either way I am simply begging for the attention of some righteous avenger…”

When that failed to be met with an armed hunter leaping at him from the shadows, he leaned against a wall, sighing. He really did feel a little drunk, he realised, at about the same instant that he understood that his blood-bloated senses had been dulled by his feast, which was probably why he was only aware of the men when they were almost upon him. Finally, he thought, the night was getting interesting, and tried not to laugh out loud as rough hands grabbed his hair and he was slammed with some force face first into a brick wall.

“Give us your fucking wallet, you fucking ponce, or I’ll slice you!”

To prove the authenticity of the threat, it was accompanied by a prod in the ribs with the tip of a sharp object and a knee pressed hard into the back of his legs, keeping him unstable, though Laclos objected less to the assault than to the rancid stink of beer and sweat cultivated by his attacker. There were three more of them, besides the man holding him; Laclos could smell the mix of excitement and nerves coming off them, fuelled by alcohol and the sweetness of a drug he couldn’t quite identify. Laclos liked to think of himself as adaptable, and if duty decreed that sex wasn’t to be on the cards, tonight, then violence could be an entertaining enough alternative, so it was an effort to keep the delight from his voice.

“I do normally thoroughly enjoy being pushed up against walls by big strong men, but I do prefer they be slightly better acquainted with the principles of basic hygiene,” he purred, which wasn’t quite the reaction the muggers expected. Not best pleased by this turn of events, the man who had Laclos pinned down pulled his hair tighter and used the grip to smack Laclos’ head, hard, off the brickwork before yanking him backwards, so that his neck was bent back at an angle that would make a human distinctly uncomfortable, though Laclos biggest complaint was that it brought his face even nearer his assailant’s breath. Surely somewhere in this city sold mouthwash? And he would have to wash his hair again, now.

“You what?” demanded the mugger, his eloquence matched by his companions, one of whom had started up a high pitched mantra of “Fucking do him, Kenny. Do him!” muttering it repeatedly like a prayer.

“Don’t kill him,” a voice said, exasperated, and the four men spun as one, though Kenny was at least smart enough not to loosen his hold on Laclos.

“We’ll fucking do you too!” was the not entirely unexpected response, and Laclos tried not to roll his eyes.

“I believe he was talking to me,” he said, tilting his head slightly so that he could see Cain, who was at the mouth of the alley, hands empty by his sides, looking deceptively relaxed for a man who had just interrupted a violent mugging. “Are you really saying you wish to protect these specimens?”

“I just think limiting the amount of bodies might be a sensible strategy, at this stage,” Cain said, slightly huffily, as if annoyed at being accused of seeming to have gone soft. Laclos was aware that the muggers were now looking at one another in open bafflement: this wasn’t how it usually went, he imagined – they were probably used to their victims crying by now, possibly urinating. Yet the man currently pinned to the wall with a knife in his ribcage was looking remarkably bored with the whole experience, and the new arrival had the air of someone given a shovel and a bucket and directed to the nearest stables.

“Jesus, this is why I stay away from cities,” Cain scowled, unhappily. “Look, just drop the knife and fuck off and… I dunno, think about being better people or something. We’ve got things to do, here.”

There was a moment of stunned silence. Then Laclos didn’t seem to have moved, but now he was holding Kenny by the throat, the Scottish man doubled up and gurgling as he discovered what it was like to be forcibly held against a wall by someone much, much stronger than you.

“You can’t seriously be considering letting them go? They’re violent criminals. This one stabbed me!” Laclos gave Kenny’s head a vicious shake for emphasis. Ah, here was the crying and urination. He stepped back, sharply, flinching slightly at the new, acrid note the already pungent alley had acquired. Cain scowled at the other men, who were now looking less like hardened criminals, more like startled rabbits.

“Oh, for fuck’s sake. Fine,” he muttered, and all three men let out involuntary yelps. Laclos made a small sound of pleasure as they turned tail and fled – they were stupid, but not that stupid – but of course it didn’t matter. Cain launched himself after them at a speed the vampire would be hard set to match, felling one man as he ran away with a kick to the back of the legs that pitched him forward onto the ground, the impact of his fall assured by the fact that Cain then used his head as a stepping stone, grabbing the hoodie of another mugger and using it to swing him round and smash him against the third, both men falling, concussed with the force of the collision. Laclos couldn’t deny the hunter could be impressive when he wanted to be, even as he tried to ignore the spike of desire and appetite that accompanied that admission.

“May I have this one, then?” he asked, shaking Kenny again, savouring the smell of fear that had blossomed on the Scotsman, who whimpered in terror, unable to free himself from Laclos’ steel grip. “I’m in the mood for another drink.”

Cain stepped forward and in one smooth movement he grabbed Laclos’ hand and swung it, mugger and all, hard against the brickwork, then prised Laclos’ fingers from the now-unconscious man.

“I think you’ve had enough already tonight.”

Then he let out a huff of surprise as Laclos, laughing, spun and threw his full weight at Cain, pushing him into the opposite wall with such ferocity that the bricks cracked on impact. Cain grunted, winded by the force of the shove, pinned with the entire length of Laclos’ body pressed against him, his right arm twisted awkwardly between them, unable to reach any of his weapons. The pressure of the vampire against him was like a concrete slab, yet Laclos didn’t seem to be expending any effort at all. Cain was pleased Dionne wasn’t here to see this, since he was pretty sure to an observer it looked like Laclos was just casually leaning against him and she was already fairly dubious about them, but he was trying to hide the fact that he felt like he’d been smacked in the chest by an iron bar. He froze as the vampire’s head dipped to his throat, his mouth almost touching skin. Cain really didn’t want to start this fight if he could help it, not least because he wasn’t entirely sure he would be the one to finish it.

“Have I had enough, though, hunter?” Laclos’ voice was hoarse, his teeth lightly grazing Cain’s neck. “How about you allow me a little nightcap to wash the taste of humans out of my mouth?”

He pulled back, glancing up at him; his eyes looked almost black in the dim light, and Cain could have sworn, for an instant, he was asking for permission. But the movement had afforded Cain the tiniest leeway, and he shifted, slightly, and Laclos’ eyes widened in surprise. There was a moment when Cain really wasn’t sure how this was going to go, then the vampire smiled.

“Ah. Much as I would like to believe you’re pleased to see me, I know you well enough to know that that is indeed a gun in your pocket.”

He pulled away from Cain, slowly, carefully rearranging his face into something approaching friendliness.

“Oh, do relax, hunter,” he scolded. “You know I was only having a little joke at your expense. If you deny me food, surely you can’t deny me other amusements?”

Cain’s expression hadn’t changed, though he was struggling to hide his relief at the vampire’s retreat.

“Not at all, I was just waiting for the bit where it got amusing for me, right when I got to shoot you in the balls.”

Laclos’ smile didn’t falter, but he tilted his head, looking at Cain like he was an enigma that he simply couldn’t decipher.

“Tell me, how much did killing a sorcerer vampire twice my age cost you?”

A nerve in Cain’s neck jumped, and he saw Laclos’ gaze twitch involuntarily towards the vein.

“Not so much I couldn’t do it again.”

“Really? Because for all your admirable ferociousness, you have the scent of a wounded animal about you, lately. I can’t help but wonder if we ever danced this dance for real, which one of us would come out on top.” Then because he was Laclos, and he couldn’t help himself, he grinned. “I should of course make it clear I have a very flexible policy on such matters.”

He stepped over the unconscious man at his feet, and headed towards the far end of the alley.

“Come, let us find your fellow traveller and see if she has had any better luck.”

Which was right when the hunter shot him, and he felt himself explode.





Chapter 17




Laclos let out an animal howl of pain and fury as the impact of the shot sent him reeling, hitting him low on the left side of his body, spinning him round at the same time as it knocked him backwards, tearing through his lower ribs like a missile in an explosion of flesh and bone. It was only as he hit the ground he realised there had been a second shot fired, and that neither had come from Cain, who was now crouched low beside him, weapon drawn, as his eyes raked the darkness, trying to see where the bullets had come from. Not able to identify a target, he leaned over the vampire, grimacing.

“Silver?”

Through gritted teeth Laclos managed a nod, curling onto his side as he clutched desperately at the gaping wound in an effort to stem the bleeding. Even fed as he was, a gut full of silver could inflict serious harm, and the blood that could heal him was even now seeping out onto the pavement. His senses were blurred with agony, and so he was barely aware when he heard heavy footsteps run towards them and, hearing Cain yell instructions, realised it must be Dionne, who took off at a run, presumably in the direction Cain had guessed their assailant had gone.

Laclos knew he was in trouble when he couldn’t even muster the energy to make a joke as Cain flipped him easily onto his back and in one smooth, sharp movement tore his shirt clean off, pulling Laclos’ hands away from the wound so he could better see the damage.

“Shit,” Cain muttered, half to himself, looking at the pattern of small punctures that surrounded the fist-sized hole in Laclos’ side, marring the usually unblemished alabaster. “Modified shotgun. Bullet and pellets. I’m sorry, man, this is going to hurt.”

Laclos bit down so hard he almost took his own tongue off.

“It is rather hurting already,” he spat, his voice tight.

“OK. Stay still.”

Laclos was about to point out that was an easy thing for the man who hadn’t been shot to say, but to his astonishment Cain clamped a hand over his mouth; which turned out to be a good thing, as otherwise all of Edinburgh would have likely heard him scream. Because then without warning Cain plunged his other hand deep into the wound, grabbing the bullet and wrenching it free, but also, as he did so, tearing off the surrounding skin, ripping the tiny silver pellets away from Laclos’ flesh. Laclos thrashed wildly, trying to free himself from Cain’s grip, his scream an almost physical thing that pushed against Cain’s palm, but Cain simply dropped the bullet and flayed skin in a gory heap beside the vampire, then, releasing him, he pushed the bundled up remains of the tattered shirt into Laclos’ hand, guiding it to the worst of the wound and pressing down against it, staunching the bloodflow until, freed of the silver toxin, the vampire could start to heal. He paused just long enough for Laclos to react and exert the pressure himself, making sure he had the strength to keep the wound compressed, and when the vampire managed a weak nod, he took off after Dionne.



He found her on the street, gun in hand but hidden under her jacket, shaking her head in frustration. The whole point of keeping her at a distance had been to keep an eye on Cain’s back as he watched Laclos’, and yet the shooter had managed to slip by them both, a fact neither was keen to dwell on.

“Did you get a look at him?” Cain asked, annoyed that he’d let Laclos distract him with that tussle in the alley.

She shook her head, again, angry at herself.

“Back of his head, running into the crowds. Not even sure it was him. Shit,” she cursed.

“Don’t be so hard on yourself. He’s a local, clearly, bet he knows this city like the back of his hand. He must’ve seen the vamp come down this alley, probably saw the muggers, so he cuts through a parallel alley so he could wait and attack him from the other side if he needs to, rather than follow him in.” He sighed, seeing the merit in the plan. “Guess he waited to see who would win in the criminals versus monsters fight, not caring too much either way. Fuck. Do a sweep, see if you can pick up any traces of him – if he’s seen us he might still be watching. I’ll go grab the vampire, we’ll circle round and meet you.”

“How the hell did he get the drop on you both?” she demanded, accusingly. “You were supposed to be looking out for him!”

“I’ll explain later. Go!”

Reluctantly, she took off into the night-time crowds, and Cain turned to go fetch the fallen vampire. Then he heard the unmistakeable sound of a gun being cocked and took off at a run. The killer hadn’t fled. He’d doubled back to finish the job.



Laclos was lying on his back in a pool of his own blood, making muffled sounds of protest – muffled, mainly, because of the shotgun that was being rammed into his mouth by the man standing straddled over his body. The human half-looked as if he had been in a show himself: a stocky, stern faced man, he wore black clothes and army boots, grey-red hair cropped soldier-short, a long duster coat flapping in the wind. Ramping up the creepy, there was also the fact that he had what looked like an embalmed human hand hanging from his belt loop, which was extreme even for the most hardcore hunter. His mouth was set into a hard line, one foot planted squarely in Laclos’ side, the heel of his boot reopening the wound that Laclos’ body was desperately trying to repair as the vampire squirmed in agony beneath him.

Cain hesitated. He could probably put one in the guy’s skull before he pulled the trigger; Laclos might even be able to survive a mouthful of silver buckshot on top of his existing injuries. But the idea of trying to explain to Cass that he’d had the chance to save the vampire and messed up… he couldn’t bear the thought of causing her that kind of pain, even as he hated the knowledge that losing Laclos would matter to her at all. And, though Cain could never be accused of being sentimental, he disliked killing humans if at all possible – oddly, most angels were trained to be fine with large scale collateral damage and / or major smiting, but squeamish about hurting individual people. Plus something about putting down another hunter without giving him a chance to surrender felt wrong to him.

Then the human spun to face him, and of course he had a gun in his other hand, too, so now Cain had two problems.

“Fucking freaks ruining my city,” the man muttered, face contorted with fury – but something more than that, Cain could tell, an edginess that bordered on manic, and made Cain more nervous than the weapons. “You know what he is! Why protect him?”

Cain put his hands up, though he kept hold of his gun.

“He’s just an actor, man. A stupid arsehole actor playing a stupid role. He’s not a threat to the city. All those people, the ones you took out. They were all just actors.”

“That’s what they want you to think!” the man hissed, spittle flying from his mouth. Clearly, this wasn’t going to go calmly. “Don’t you see what they’re doing? Look at you, how long have you been in the life? Five years? Ten? I’ve been doing this my whole life, lad, my whole life! And I’m telling you, they’re taking over. Used to be this city was safe, this was where I came home to, but now look at it. They’ve got their spies and their … their PR and it’s everywhere!” He looked at Cain, his eyes wide, but there was something desperate in his expression, as if he needed Cain to believe him, as if this were an argument he’d made many times, to many unbelievers. “You think they’re just actors, but they’re infiltrating! The things we hunt… they’re supposed to be scared of them, the Normals. That’s what keeps them safe, stops them from looking in corners where they shouldn’t be looking. But now these people… these things… they’re taking what should be evil and terrifying and making it seem normal and sexy and pretending it’s all OK.” Cain tried his best to look understanding – the guy may clearly be a few clips short of a magazine but he was making a point Cain himself had a lot of sympathy with. Then the man moved his foot from Laclos’ body, and there was a sickening squelch as the flesh started to close up. “An actor, yeah?” he demanded, bitterly pleased by the sight. “If he was human, could he do that?”

This time Cain didn’t hesitate.

“Fuck me, he really is a vampire!” he exclaimed, then lowered his gun and fired off a couple of shots square into Laclos’ chest. The human cried out in shock and leapt out of the way, almost losing his footing in his hurry. He looked at the dead vampire at his feet then stared at Cain in open astonishment. Cain shrugged.

“My bad. I thought he was just another freak in a costume. C’mon, we should get out of here before anyone reports the shots.” He leaned down and picked up Laclos’ body, hoisting him over his shoulder then unceremoniously tipping him into one of the large communal bins that lined the alley. The man watched him, suspicious, but the angel just shrugged.

“Seriously, man, we need to move,” he gave the human a light shove towards the main street. Edinburgh at Festival time might be rowdy, but surely someone would hear all this noise and call the police? He had no idea of what he was going to do with the guy once he got him away from all these bodies, but he didn’t want whatever it was to be complicated by the arrival of law enforcement. Plus, no matter how hard he’d hit them – and Cain hit people pretty hard – those muggers would be coming round soon, and he didn’t want to be in the vicinity when they woke up. Unfortunately, life, as ever lately, seemed to have other plans.



“You stay right where you are,” a voice snarled, and Cain sighed. He really missed the simplicity of his usual hunts, which generally involved breaking down doors and killing everything inside.

“He’s not working alone, Dad!”

Of course. What was it with messed up families of hunters lately? This was starting to be a trend in Cain’s life – it was the second time he and the vamp had come up against a family tag team, although the first had been a fairly incompetent pair of wannabes. The new arrival was young – late teens at a push – and dressed in camouflage, which, outside being on actual soldiers, was never a good sign in Cain’s experience, tending to illustrate a trigger happy mentality and pretensions to bad-assery that were rarely backed up with actual skill. It also wasn’t great that he had a gun in his hand which was currently digging into Dionne’s side as he pushed her into an alley that now felt more crowded than one of the city’s bloody makeshift theatre spaces. Still, Cain could read the situation in a glance, and tried not to show it in his voice. The kid’s eyes flitted nervously from his father to Cain, aware that both were still holding their weapons.

“You OK, Dad?”

The older hunter nodded, slowly, as if confused by these new developments, and he suddenly looked very old indeed, his eyes slightly clouded. The angel realised, then, just how tenuous a hold the man had on the situation. He could sense him struggling, underneath the righteous fury, a man whose link to reality was frayed and fragile – his arguments might make some kind of sense, but Cain doubted there was a lot of genuine rationality behind them. Cain had lived long enough to see plenty of madness in his time, and he knew, right at that moment, that this was what he was looking at, the razor sharp rage that was sometimes all that could focus a disintegrating mind. He put as much friendliness as he could into his voice, though admittedly by this stage that wasn’t a whole lot.

“Look, we’re all in the same game, here – we made an honest mistake with the vampire, but he’s dead now, so how about we take this somewhere a little less crime-sceney, preferably somewhere with beer?”

He saw Dionne’s eyes widen at the news of Laclos’ demise, but she said nothing. The other two humans looked at one another, not sure of how this was supposed to go. One man confounded by what used to be second nature to him, the other too young to yet be able to read the ebb and flow of a fight. Cain actually felt sort of sorry for them. But then the teenager blew that card, by giving Dionne another sharp, angry poke with the gun.

“How about you stay here till we get clear and we take the girl as security?” he snarled, clearly panicked by the distant look on his father’s face.

“Yeah, look,” Dionne scowled. “There’s a couple of things Daddy Winchester here didn’t tell you in hunter bootcamp. One, it’s rude to call a woman more than twice your age a ‘girl’. The second is if you hold a gun on someone…” There was a swift, complicated movement and a yelp of pain, and the young man was on his knees, keening, one hand twisted painfully in Dionne’s grip. “Don’t hold it close enough for them to grab it off you.” She looked at Cain, shrugged. “Figured it was easier to ‘get caught’ than try and chase him down the street.”

“Good call,” Cain nodded. Then, “Oh, for fuck’s sake!”

Dionne’s actions had snapped the boy’s father from his daze, and he had raised his weapons, so was now holding a gun on both of them. Cain sighed. He had been in Mexican stand offs before, but never in an alley that was knee deep in bodies and metres away from a busy street. This was actually starting to feel a little ridiculous. Almost casually, he pointed his own weapon at the boy.

“You know you can’t possibly take out both of us before one of us shoots your son.”

“I can kill her before you shoot me.”

“Well, boo-fucking-hoo for her, but since we just met last night, I gotta tell you that’s not really an unmitigated tragedy for me. The only reason I don’t shoot all of you right now and get out of this frigging annoying town is I don’t want to clean up three more bodies when we could walk away from this as friends.”

The old man’s eyes flicked from Dionne to Cain, trying to gauge their relationship, but neither one’s face gave anything away. He hesitated then slowly lowered the gun he had pointed at Dionne, re-holstering it. Rather creepily, this left his hand free to stroke the grisly talisman at his belt, as if for reassurance, but Cain decided not to notice that.

“OK,” the old hunter said. “Let him up, we all go. A vampire’s dead, we did a good night’s work.”

Dionne gave a slow nod, and released her hold on the boy, who got sulkily to his feet. Cain lowered his gun, and the old man followed suit, and they regarded one another with an air of cautious détente. Cain felt himself relax, slightly. Maybe they could get out of this without too much more bloodshed, after all, get the old guy somewhere they could talk properly to him, perhaps persuade him to seek the help he so obviously needed. Then the angry, pain-maddened vampire exploded out of the dumpster, and everything went to hell.





Chapter 18




It happened so fast even Cain couldn’t stop it. Laclos erupted from the bin with a roar of fury, and before Cain could move he launched himself at the old hunter and threw his arms around his shoulders, wide open mouth at this neck, and with one, fierce shake of his head he had torn the man’s throat clean away. Dionne ducked into a crouch and fired, her first two bullets burying themselves uselessly into the body Laclos was now using as a shield, the third missing completely as Cain dived towards her and nudged her aim high.

“The fuck…?” she demanded, though the words were then knocked out of her as Laclos threw the still-gushing corpse at her with such force she fell backwards, winded. Cain spun to face him, and for a moment both men froze: Laclos stared, eyes wild and fangs bared, some instinct telling him that here, so close, was true healing, and he only had to reach out to take it. Cain tensed, waiting for the attack, but instead Laclos let out a mewl of frustration and turned on his heels and fled. The teenager had been stunned for a moment, staring in frozen horror at his father’s bloody demise but, adrenaline kicking in, his legs unlocked and, taking advantage of the chaos, he took off in the other direction. Cain swore loudly. He spared a glance at Dionne to check she was unharmed – she was doing a fair bit of swearing herself as she freed herself from under the old man’s body, her own now drenched in his arterial blood – then he raced off after the young hunter.



In normal circumstances, this wouldn’t even be a competition. Even under par as he was, Cain was faster, stronger and a better shot than any human, but pursuing a skinny, nimble and highly motivated teenage boy through a crowd of drinkers and tourists was a whole other matter, unless Cain wanted to mow them down or shoot through them. Humans were usually good at getting out of his way, but only if he gave them time to register his presence: at speed he would simply have to plough through them. He came to an angry halt next to one of the ubiquitous street entertainers who cluttered up the pavements; the boy had a good lead on him, weaving in and out of pedestrians like the local he was. Then Cain looked at the man standing next to him, and had an idea.



Panting, terrified, his lungs white hot and heavy in his chest, the young hunter was starting to flag, trying to keep running while checking for the sounds of pursuit. He allowed himself a quick glance back, feeling a surge of relief as he saw only Normals behind him, then he skidded to a halt as there was a swooping whoosh of air and the open-topped rubbish bin just in front of him exploded into flames. He spun, shocked, trying to figure out how fire had just rained from the sky, which conveniently meant he was looking up when the juggling club completed its long, high arc and smacked him right in the face. The crowds abruptly parted, someone screaming as the boy pitched over backwards like a fallen tree. Cain, who had thrown both projectiles in a trajectory that had sailed over the heads of the pedestrians, was holding a third, ready to throw. Dropping it, he was about to run up and snatch the fallen human when he heard the sound of loud clapping and Dionne was speaking, her voice raised above the shrill panic of the crowds.

“And that, people, is real theatre!” She strode forward, boldly, applauding dramatically, before bowing low towards Cain and the baffled juggler whose goods he had purloined. People had stopped, now, pedestrians and drinkers both, looking between the youth lying on the pavement and this new plot twist, and as Dionne walked confidently up to the unconscious boy and scooped him up, slinging one arm across his shoulder and folding him in a bow, Cain could hear shock turn to murmurs of approval, or even scorn: of course it was another bloody show, this was Edinburgh, wasn’t it? Just another troupe of actors being cutting edge and ‘immersive', right? They could have had someone’s hair on fire with that bin trick, it shouldn’t be allowed, but you had to admit that was impressive, right? He probably hadn’t even thrown it, the bin was rigged to light up when the young bloke reached it, bet that’s how it was done, sleight of hand, clever misdirection. Cain’s mouth fell open: people were actually applauding, now, as a blood-splattered Dionne made a sweeping gesture with her free arm towards him and the juggler. Taking his cue, Cain also gave a brief bow, and a firm hand on the back of the juggler’s neck encouraged him to follow suit.

“Thank you, thank you! If you’re impressed by our tricks, please show your appreciation to our friend!” She gestured to the juggler’s collecting tin, a move which was guaranteed to thin out the onlookers, though the fact that some actually did step forward and throw money cheered up the juggler somewhat, especially when Cain chucked in a couple of tenners of his own, before taking off after Dionne, who had miraculously managed to flag down a taxi and was now bundling their prize inside.





Chapter 19




“I really can’t say I’m thrilled about this idea,” Dionne muttered. Cain shrugged, scowling.

“Welcome to the baseline emotion of my life.”

It was 3am, and this argument had gone on a while.



“You’re working with the vampire! I saw you let him go!” the boy had screamed, when he finally came round, thrashing at the duct tape that bound him to the chair. Dionne said nothing. She’d noticed that herself, and still wasn’t sure what she felt about Cain being quite so relaxed about letting the vampire escape.

“He was working with us, trying to stop you,” Cain said, his voice – for him – almost gentle. “You’ve been killing innocent people. I don’t know what your dad told you, kid, but they were just actors. Performers, here for the shows. Trust me, the real thing is much harder to take out.”

The young hunter shook his head, horrified and disbelieving, his eyes bright with the same fever that had been in his father’s. Then Cain could almost see his internal gears working, filtering the facts through his own deranged faith.

“Don’t you get it? That doesn’t matter. They were still part of it, still…still collaborators! Maybe some of them were human, that doesn’t make them innocent! They deserved it, and if their deaths brought out their vampire protectors… ” he trailed off, realising he had given too much away. Not that he got a chance to say anything else, because that was when Cain hit him and he slumped back into sleep. Now they just had to decide what to do with him.



They were in a lock-up garage on the outskirts of the city. Like all hunters, Dionne needed storage, and there were some things she clearly didn’t want lying around the flat for her schoolteacher mother to stumble upon. Cain had bailed from the cab once they were off the main street, doubling back to the alley and doing a little set dressing. It took only a few well-placed blows to make sure the muggers were still out for the count and while he suspected the police, summoned by an anonymous tip, might wonder how one of the men came to be unconscious with his knife sticking out of the neck of a corpse, while the another held the gun that had fired into the body, they surely wouldn’t look that much further, especially since, Cain suspected, such brain surgeons as their attackers had seemed to be were clearly too dim not to have racked up any police attention in their criminal careers. It was an ugly, less than perfect fix, but it was an ugly, less than perfect world, so Cain could live with that. Dionne, however, once she heard him out, wasn’t looking happy.

“Do you have a better plan?” he asked.

“Better than the one which involves us trusting a whacked out vampire that you should have let me take down? How about any plan other than that?”

“So what do you suggest we do?” he demanded, exasperated. “Turn the kid in to the cops with no evidence? Kill him? There’s CCTV all over that street, you want to bet we’re not on film putting him into that cab? You’re a distinctive looking woman, Dionne, you think the cabbie won’t remember the hot black chick with the fuck off scar who had the strangely silent fellow passenger with her in the back seat? I can be in the wind in seconds, but you have ties here. You really want to make it so you can never come back?”

She scowled, hating that he was right. She looked at the young hunter – still tied to the chair, gagged and unconscious, he really did look like little more than a child.

“You think he even knows how messed up he is?”

“I think hunting’s an isolated life and it attracts a certain type of person. Daddy cracks up – pressure of the job, Alzheimer’s, dementia, whatever – how hard is it gonna be to convince his son that there’s bad stuff out there, and that he’s got a plan to stop it? Kill the monsters passing as human, and if you kill a few sympathisers along the way, big deal – you’re putting another vamp in the frame and sooner or later that’ll draw more of them out – even a crazy hunter knows a spree like that can’t go unpunished. I mean, it was actually a pretty good plan, psychotic delusion and innocent victims aside.”

“That is a small drawback,” Dionne deadpanned.

“I’m not saying we give the guy a posthumous hunter medal or anything, just that it wasn’t as dumb or random as it seemed. Vampires are dead anyway, so a disembodied hand is going to leave the same scent for anyone who can picks up on it – who’s going to believe in a human killer if you get a whiff of vamp? Then you make the kills inconclusive enough that they could be vamps, or not, you kill two birds with one stone. You keep the attention local and manageable, but you still get to take out the infiltrators, with a chance of taking out the vamps that come after you to stop them, clean up the city for good. I can see that idea coming across as reasonable to an impressionable kid, especially one raised in the life by a hunter who pretty clearly lost the plot a while back.”

“So you think he knew we were tailing Laclos, figured us for the bad guys on the clean up crew?”

Cain shrugged again.

“They didn’t seem real surprised to see us.”

She frowned, looking at the boy again.

“OK, but brainwashed or not, he killed people. This feels an awful lot like we’re letting him off scot free.”

“His father’s dead, I’m guessing he’s alone in the world, and we’re about to take off him the one thing he thinks he knows. You really think that’s not a punishment?”

She let out a long breath.

“OK, fine, but you see why I have a problem with the big fucking chunk of this plan that relies on cooperation from the vampire who we just saw go mental and tear someone’s throat out. I’m not entirely clear why we aren’t arming up and going after him.”

“He took out a murderer who’d pumped him full of silver, and who was planning to shoot him in the face. Justified kill, I’d say.”

Dionne looked sceptical.

“I’d love to know why you trust that bloodsucker so much, Cain,” she said, but when it became clear he wasn’t going to answer that, she had another objection. “Anyway, even if he would help us, how are you going to ask him? You have his number on your phone or something? How will you find him? He could be halfway back to London by now.”

“I don’t have to find him. He’ll find me.”





Chapter 20




Cain was usually very careful where he left his motorbike. Not because he was worried about it getting stolen – expensive and desirable it might be, but it was also pretty much theft-proof, since a shaman who owed him a favour had rigged it so that any unauthorised riders would get a very nasty shock indeed. But it was rare, and recognisable, so leaving it in plain sight was a fairly obvious calling card for those who wished to find him, and Cain didn’t usually want to be found. Tonight, though, he left it parked right in the open. It took the vampire less than half an hour.



Laclos slid smoothly into the booth onto the seat opposite him, nodding appreciatively at the glass of whisky that was waiting for his arrival. Despite his somewhat ragged attire – he was bare chested, still, his cape and trousers stained with blood – he barely attracted a second glance, or at least not because of his outfit. This was the kind of place where performers in the know came to wind down after a show, mixing unobtrusively with those who were finishing off a night on the town and those for whom the nocturnal hours were for conducting business. Cain was a man who could find an open bar pretty much anywhere, or at least had contacts who could do so for him, and he suspected that the low key atmosphere and the flagrant flouting of even Edinburgh’s generous Festival licensing hours had a more supernatural explanation. Certainly he’d picked up on the flicker of interest on the barmaid’s face when Laclos walked in, and it had been less the usual reaction to a man who looked quite that good – and who was currently not wearing a shirt – than someone recognising the real thing when they saw it.

“A Wiccan, do you think?” Laclos asked, without turning around to look at her, and Cain, mildly impressed, gave a small nod.

“So did you summon me here to scold me, hunter? To warn me against taking a human life? Because, in my defence, being shot full of silver, having a bullet ripped out of you and then being shot again can do things to any creature’s self-control. Though I have you to thank, I suppose, that the second round of injuries were not fatal.” He ran a pale hand across his chest, which was now as smooth and unmarked as ever. “That is, I assume you knew I could recover from lead bullets – and, indeed, that your gun was currently loaded with them – and not that you were happy to simply shoot me to keep your cover intact?”

Cain gave him a cold smile.

“Can’t say I didn’t enjoy it.”

“Well,” Laclos said, unoffended, “I admit it wouldn’t be my fantasy scenario of how the two of us in a dark alley plays out, but since I do have that scenario, I don’t suppose I can begrudge you yours.”

“If you thought that was what I wanted, why’d you show up?”

Laclos’ hand again smoothed over the muscle of his chest, the space where Cain’s bullets had struck. Cain noticed that the barmaid was now watching him for a whole other reason, and wondered if Laclos was doing it on purpose, or if he was genuinely unaware of the effect he was having. Probably the former, he guessed. For creatures that, by necessity, lived in the shadows, vampires tended to be total attention-seeking bastards.

“Because I owe you, and I assumed you wish me to somehow repay the favour. Or at the very least you were seeking reassurance I hadn’t gone screaming mad back to London and put those we both… care about… at risk.”

Cain slid a piece of paper across the table, an address written on it in an untidy script.

“I need you to compel him. Tell him whatever lies you need to, but he needs to be decommissioned in a way that won’t draw attention.”

Laclos quirked an eyebrow.

“It is interesting how ready you are to bend the rules when it suits you, hunter.”

“You mean like letting a murderous bloodsucker walk free?”

“Touché,” the vampire nodded. “But how do I know that I won’t arrive and find your trigger-happy companion waiting for me?”

“She’ll go along with it. I mean, she’s not pleased. But then I have a long history of women being angry with me, so we’ll both just have to live with that. If you need me to come with for security, I’ll do that, but…”

He trailed off, and Laclos regarded him curiously, understanding both why the offer was not a good idea, and what Cain was saying by making it. It was clear the hunter understood just how unwise it was for them to be in a confined space together right now, and the fact that he was willing to risk it was a gesture of faith that both were reluctant to openly acknowledge.

“It is funny, is it not,” Laclos said, softly, “how it is sometimes easier to trust an old enemy than a new friend? I suspect that, were you honest with me about your true nature, on inspection we would have more similarities than our taste in human women – perhaps have more in common than we do with the humans at all.” Cain said nothing, but he didn’t look like he particularly disagreed. “But you are correct. Indebted to one another as we seem to be once more, I suspect being in a locked room together might try the limits of both of our self-control.” He took another sip of his whisky, and this time didn’t look up as he spoke. “In case you are concerned, I have no intention of telling her of our encounter, or of your new companion, I assure you. I want Cassandra in my bed because she cannot bear to be elsewhere, not driven there because she is angry or jealous over you.”

Cain still didn’t speak, though Laclos thought he saw a degree of tension leave his shoulders.

“You haven’t threatened me yet, though, hunter. I feel almost neglected. Isn’t this traditionally the part of the evening where you say that you’ll rip my fangs out if I ever put them near you again?”

Cain made a sound that was somewhere between a sigh and a laugh, his voice heavy.

“Honestly, vampire, if I wanted to punish you for trying to drink from me… I’d let you drink from me.”

Laclos’ smile faltered, seeing not an ounce of a lie in Cain’s face.

“Ah. Then I suppose it is fortunate that you are steering clear of London, so temptation is out of both of our way.”

“Guess so.”

At that, Laclos did laugh.

“Oh, hunter, whatever you are, while you remain in many ways an utter mystery to me, in some aspects you are woefully transparent.” He stood up. “Give me one hour, your job will be done.” Then in one smooth, fluid movement he finished his drink, swept up the piece of paper and – because he could, so why not? – twirled his cape around him and strode off into the night.



It was just after breakfast when the doorbell rang. Dionne jolted awake from her nap, grabbing her bag – with the gun in easy reach inside it – and went to answer, calling out, “I’ll get it, Mum!” as she went.

She wasn’t exactly surprised to see Cain standing there, though was slightly annoyed that he looked a lot less knackered than she was.

“I swung by the lock-up.” He handed her the scrap of paper on which he’d written the address. In elegant if somewhat blurred script, the other side bore the words, ‘It’s done.’

“Is that blood?”

“I don’t think there was a lot of room for a pen in that outfit. But there weren’t any signs of blood anywhere else, so I figure even if he did feed, he wasn’t greedy.” He saw her expression. “Look, I know it sounds nuts to you, but I trust him not to kill the guy.” She looked less than convinced, and his voice rose, slightly. “And I know nothing about this doesn’t suck, but that’s why we don’t hunt in modern cities, right? It’s too fucking complicated.” He took a breath, shaking his head. “You don’t always get to choose the way the game plays out, or whose side you end up on.”

His shoulders slumped, and now he did look tired – an exhaustion that seemed both sudden and bone deep.

She hesitated, then pulled the door open wider.

“You want a coffee before you hit the road?”



He watched her, idly, as she moved around the kitchen, making drinks, utterly relaxed and at home, and couldn’t help wondering, not for the first time, if humans didn’t have it right after all: that the advantage of small lives was that you valued small things; that keeping an eye on eternity meant that you always missed out on today. Maybe Laclos hadn’t been that far off; maybe that was why occasionally Cain felt he had more in common with the vampires he hunted than the humans he protected, the effort it took for the details not to blur. He wondered if the reason he had defended Laclos’ life was really just because of Cass, or was it because he’d encountered so few people through his history who could even come close to comprehending what he was, that he was reluctant to lose someone who might be able to, even if that someone was an annoying, arrogant prick who made his fists twitch. Maybe when you were around quite literally forever, you didn’t get to be that picky about your allies.

He tried to banish such happy thoughts, smiling gratefully as Dionne handed him a mug of coffee and joined him at the table. She didn’t look particularly cheerful herself.

“How long do you think he’d been like that, the old guy… though, Christ, I say old,” she frowned. “He was probably just 10 or 15 years or so older than me. Do you think something happened to turn him, he got sick, or the life just sent him crazy?”

“Does it matter?”

“I just don’t see a lot of old hunters. Be nice to think some made it out in one piece.” She looked around the kitchen and sighed. “Maybe this is a sign that I should give it up, come back to Scotland, spend time with my mum while I still have her around. Maybe even meet a guy, settle down.”

He must have looked sceptical, because her voice turned defensive.

“Look, you do this job as long as I have and see how you feel.”

Cain looked like he was going to say something, then changed his mind.

“You could be right,” he said, eventually. “I feel like I’ve been doing this for eternity. I’m not sure it’s any way to live.” He looked sad, then, and old beyond his years, and for a second Dionne again felt it, that nagging feeling of something not quite right; but then he picked up his mug and took a long drink, breaking the moment’s spell. There was a pregnant silence; then she laughed, shaking her head as if trying to clear it.

“Who are we fucking kidding, though, right? If we had any sense we wouldn’t be doing this in the first place.” She raised her mug in a toast. “To bad decisions.”

He chinked his mug against hers.

“Bad decisions.”

She tilted her head to one side, regarding him with a slow smile.

“So, speaking of poor choices, I’m guessing it would be a terrible idea for you to hang around for a while? Get a day’s, ah, rest, before you hit the road again.”

Cain took a long drink of coffee.

“Pretty much,” he agreed, solemnly. “Then again, like the vampire said, I’m really not that smart.”








