Derrida’s demarcation of isomorphism elucidates the phantasy of the binary or opposite as not a relation between two but as a subjugation of all others by a dominant one. Deleuze and Guattari critique taxonomy as not made up of a series of opposites but all alterity as fallen man. One could be tempted to say that this alone aligns the subjugated terms – animal, woman, children and so forth – as necessarily sympathetic to each others’ conditions through various mechanisms of power, oppres- sion and resistance. This concept has been suggested by many animal rights activists, feminists, children’s rights activists and queer theorists. In other areas theories of the posthuman suggest that there is no longer a category of human, or, more precisely, the category of human was always the mythical zenith of an equally mythical arboreal structure which systematised human subjectivity through religious, metaphysical and evolutionary discourses. Instead of God making man, secular scien- tists now make their own possibility of dominance through discourses that demarcate the hu-Man as a hermeneutic and given ‘natural’ phe- nomenon. While many feminists, particularly Luce Irigaray, see the bifur- cation between man and woman as the most obvious and deterministic binary, I would argue that that which divides man from animal encom- passes a far wider colonisation of life through discourse. As feminists struggle with the conundrum of how to define ourselves without reifying or essentialising the female, all other entities drop away. Animal entities, more correctly non-human animals, in their almost infinite varieties, pose a far greater challenge to thought, be it through activism, philosophy or science. Closing the chasm between the human and the animal is like closing the gap between discourse and non-discourse, between thought and the unthinkable but nonetheless necessary, and between our own relationships with our human selves as what Guattari calls an ecosophy. Deleuze and Guattari emphasise that ‘between the two there is threshold and fiber, symbiosis or passage between heterogeneities’ (1987: 250), not relation but production. Despite the problems of unspeech or unthought in the face of pure alterity ‘becoming can and should be qualified as becoming-animal even in the absence of a term that would be the animal become’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1987: 238). While non-human animals cannot negotiate through human discourse, they each (not each species but each animal) emit powers, haeccities, singularities of force with which we and they can enter into a relation. How does this relate to queer theory? Deleuze is emphatic that desire is inherent in all power formations, from the Church’s desire for man’s own self-realisation through God to science’s desire for the power to naturalise self at the expense and explicitly through mechanisms of objectification and analysis of all others. The human is its own desire for itself. Desiring a relation with the power(s) of an irreducible other alters dominant power structures through desire, creating what Deleuze and Guattari call an ‘unnatural alliance’. ‘It is not sufficient to liberate our- selves from sexuality; it is also necessary to liberate ourselves from the notion of sexuality itself’ (Foucault 2000: 245). Liberation from the notion of human liberates us from humanist transcendental metaphysics and the powers it expresses. Dualistically constructed society territorialises every system, every struc- ture and every mode of existence. This sets up all entities as analogies of proportion or series – a is not b – and relations of proportionality or structure – as a is to b so c is to d. In hybrid theory as a queer theory the most important part of these analogous relations are not the terms but the gaps between the terms. Hybrids present an encounter of self as more- than-one. Hybrids frequently take the form of two entities involuted or collapsed into one form or event. Hybrids challenge the belief in unity, phyla and absolute differentiation of elements, species, things and sub- jects. Hybrids are not all alike, however. While the hybrid is more-than- one – usually a mix of two – the relation of two can vary greatly depending on its function, its spatio-temporal incarnation and its appre- hension by its own self and others. The following section will explore some encounters between gender hybrids, animal hybrids and sexual hybrids as both evidence of reifying symbols of human culture and as potential becomings. Hybrids are frequently encountered as ‘monsters’. Thus beyond the monster as a hybrid entity, the response to and relation with the monster is hybrid. Monsters stereotypically are reviled as nature’s mistakes, and physical deformity is frequently associated with mental or moral turpitude. The collapse of sexual perversion and ani- malised human hybrid offspring is seen everywhere from myth to modern popular apocrypha. The union between Leda and her swan lover resulted in the beautiful but destructive twins Clytaemnestra and Helen. Pasiphae’s love for a bull produced Phaedra, whose incestuous desires resulted in the death of her stepson. The so-called ‘elephant man’ Joseph Merrick, wolf children and other victims of congenital deformities have the malformations which cause their bodies to deviate from the ‘human’ named after animals. The archetype animal is analogy rather than thresh- old encounter. As an arbitrary example, religious icons such as the Egyptian baboon who worships the sun or the knowledgeable Ibis whose beak reflects the arc of the moon, both incarnated as the god Thoth, rep- resent wisdom. Of course, these early examples are hijacked and fetishised in modern culture; their original use and relation to society remain enigmatic. The strong eagle and the triumphant lion are some examples of recent and current nationalist symbols of superiority. Zoophiles are not becoming animal but are going steady with their Oedipal animal boyfriends and girlfriends. The Oedipal puppy baby no longer knows its own dogginess and is forced into a becoming-human. Similarly Donna Haraway warns against the Oedipalisation of dogs as surrogate children. However, in The Companion Species Manifesto she simultaneously claims the dog-human relation is a hybrid one, but nonetheless the dog term is a trained one, thus the dog is becoming- human. ‘In reality the animal captured by man is deterritorialised by human force’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1981: 100). In terms of animal rights ‘the deterritorialized animal force in turn precipitates and intensi- fies the deterritorialization of the deterritorializing human force’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1981: 100). Speciesist language relies inherently on the use of animal euphemisms to explain uniquely human oppressive or offensive behaviour – behaving ‘like’ an animal, being a ‘fat pig’ or ‘stupid cow’ relegates those whose behaviour is seemingly monstrous to a hybrid state. All these examples of hybridity are symbolic, but the qualities the animals symbolise are entirely human creations established through rigidly human paradigms and perceptions, colonising animals not only with certain qualities but only allowing animals to exist within the single human system of reality and perception. Symbolic animal hybrids represent the animal as colonised by human phantasmatic investments of qualities and images. The Minotaur is not half man-half bull and the stupid cow is not a human whose stupidity is ‘like’ a cow. These are what Deleuze and Guattari would call analogies of proportion. A cow here is a human’s investment of a malignant human quality into a non-human entity to both reiterate human dominance and keep the human being as being human a flawless, refined and culturally self-authoring entity. Hybrids created through derogative language are usually made from the majoritarian with the female, homosexual or animal. Misogynist vernacular revels in the tasty thighs and breasts of women for sexual consumption. Insults as banal as ‘girl’, through the more extreme ‘cunt’, ‘fag’ and ‘chicken’, can only create hybrids if the insulted term is explicitly dominant. An insult is always a demand for rectification. It demands a turn away from the res- onant intensity the majoritarian shares with the queer, female or animal. Just as ‘queer’ reclaims the insult to deny or reorient its derogatory power, an ethical becoming would reclaim derogatory insults of hybrid- ity to launch majoritarian subjectivity on a line of flight toward other possibilities of power and desire. Certain hybrids are celebrated in postmodernity that are not taken nec- essarily as aberrations, but as fetishisations of experimental sexuality, subjectivity and transgressive behaviours. Both Foucault and Deleuze have expressed disdain for the transgressive subject as a reactive rather than active or creative force. Transgressive subjectivity is an enunciation of identity. Announcing acts of transgression through descriptions of explicit sets of acts compels the repetition of those acts to maintain the transgression, even though all acts and all repetitions invoke different intensities. While transgressive hybridity has a place in concrete activa- tions of power shifts, resistance comes from negotiations which are forced rather than fun (though they can be both). Becomings may also not be aware of the limits they access and challenge and these limits are usually only encountered accidentally. The purpose and function of becomings are also not known, so they neither structure their activation nor predict their effects, and of course becomings have no result. Transgressions risk subsuming their effects through speech – transgres- sion is less important than to be seen to transgress or to articulate what and how one transgresses, a kind of inverse, reverse or perverse psycho- analysis. Transgression for its own sake lacks experimentation in its incarnations because it both relies on and reifies the limits it transgresses, not cutting a trajectory across or in-between binaries but challenging the one through various goading. Deleuze and Guattari’s masochist is zero intensity, alone but not dividuated bodily signified self. Deleuze’s masochist tends more toward a traumatised Oedipal entity seeking an impossible catharsis (1991). The too trendy switch-hitter bisexual has no becomings. While entering into different intensities with each gender, the ‘each’ affirms there are only two, and that desire is always dialectic, not between but as a structure of two. ‘Bisexuality is no better a concept than the separateness of the sexes. It is as deplorable to miniaturize, internal- ize the binary machine as it is to exacerbate it; it does not extricate us from it’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1987: 276). Queer refuses the binaries of heterosexual and homosexual and therefore male and female. Queer is the pure indeterminate of nothing or everything, but explicitly of the unspeakable and unrepresentable, not because queer is aberrant but because within majoritarian language there are no words. Like animal languages the language of queer does not translate syntactically and, most importantly, paradigmatically or epistemically. Similarly, drag- ging up, be it toward ‘authenticity’ or experimentally, maintains the symbols of each gender in order to draw attention to the transgression. Authenticity attempts to minimise signifiers of one gender, thus acknowl- edging and reiterating their symbolic importance, while intensifying the symbols of the other. The transvestite then is a mish-mash hybrid, teeming with symbols belonging to one or another, but not ambiguous enough to be constructed through the spaces between the symbols. The male-as-female or female-as-male is an established alliance at war, rather than an unnatural alliance. An over-symbolised body, even if the symbols jar with each other, is still an explicitly signified body and not the Body without Organs created from unnatural alliances and signified bodies. Dressing as a woman spatialises subjectivity, moving from one site to its opposite. Becoming-woman, like all becomings, puts an emphasis on movement not place, on force not form. Monique Wittig’s famous ‘les- bians are not women’ (1992: 32) exploits the impossibility of two of the same being comprehensible as two in heterocentric society. In this instance one could argue transgressions of drag rectify the powers of refusing binaries by making two lesbians butch and femme. As the first step in becomings, through which Deleuze and Guattari argue women themselves must pass, is becoming-women, arguably lesbians are already moving toward becoming-otherwise. As they are not two they are always and already one and more than one, an unnatural alliance because two singularities together are not dialectic and yet not the same. They are the space in between. Becomings are proximities. Being in proximity with a same that is not the same (that is, a woman who is not a woman because ‘she’ is not opposed to a man as I am also not a woman but not the same as this not-woman) creates a particularly amorphic alliance. Indeed as before and beyond woman – the subjugated first binary term of the human – may mean lesbians are before and beyond the human. They are like animals in that all they are is what they are not – human. Lesbian ‘identity’ suggests inhuman identity, unable to be biunivocalised, thus les- bianism is a very unnatural alliance. Should all becomings pass through a becoming-lesbian? Or rather, through becoming the sound of lesbians? The musical problem of the machinery of the voice necessarily implies the abolition of the overall dualism machine, in other words, the molar forma- tion assigning voices to the man or woman. Being a man or woman no longer exists in music. (Deleuze and Guattari 1987: 303–4) Speech machines favour dualisms. Society fears packs that infect or recruit. Predatory lesbians, butch-animal and thus unnatural ‘hairy- chested’ feminists (an insult hurled at me personally!), animal rights activists are all on the prowl and on the howl because theirs is a speech of desire in a different language, imperceptible and incoherent to majori- tarian ears. The lesbian language is perverse, the female language hys- terical, the child’s language undeveloped and the activist’s language extreme and dangerous. Just as the wolf’s howl is a call to desire through mating and to hunting, these minoritarian howls threaten through desire and hunting majoritarian language. Far from needing to be represented in society, the unrepresentability of the sound of lesbian desire is its power. I am not suggesting lesbians need not be recognised and acknowl- edged, but not recognised within male/female dualistic speech machines. Like animals, lesbians are a sonority, and like lesbians ‘not only do animals have colours and sounds but they do not wait for the painter or musician to use those colours and sounds in a painting or music’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1987: 305). Ethically it is the responsibility of the majori- tarian to enter the designified and desubjectified sonorities and satura- tions of these terms, not to represent them within dualistic discursive machines. Becoming-animal is not colonising an animal with human per- ceptions of its nature, but finding an escape route from the human. ‘You do not become a barking molar dog, but by barking, if it is done with enough feeling, with enough necessity and composition, you emit a mol- ecular dog’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1987: 275). Dog is intensity threshold, and barking a good example as it is difficult to signify as a language but is deeply corporeal and visceral if performed for long enough and with enough commitment to the bark and less to the self-barking. Experiments with the question ‘what sound does a lesbian make?’ could be the cata- lyst for an interesting becoming-project. Another postmodern example of transgressive sexuality which creates non-becoming hybrids is animal sex. Animals continue to haunt man’s imagination, compel him to seek out their habits, preferences and cycles, and provide models and formulae by which he comes to represent [and make superior] his own desires, needs and excite- ments. (Grosz 1995: 187–8) Furries, plushies, animal role-play, training and bestiality assimilate the animal toward the human rather than attempt entrance into other inten- sities. Man uses animals to express the most deplorable of desires which make his own sacred, and at turns uses animal desire to excuse certain human prejudices and urges as ‘natural’. Fancying riding your lover with a horse tail in her anus, or a furry care-bear suit on, or having sex with your horse (beyond the deeply troubling ethical implications of raping animals) do not excite becomings but ‘tame’ them. The horse-boyfriend is part of the same family as the Oedipal dog. The few examples above show that, while technically hybrids are defined by their inability to reproduce, certain hybrids are able to repro- duce because they reproduce binary machines. They may attempt to redistribute the isomorphic intensity but end up with a continuous cele- bration, not of becomings, but of the variety of extensions and incar- nations the human is capable of. The human becomes all through encroaching on the very intensities which threaten its sanctity. These hybrids exist within what Deleuze and Guattari, after Canetti, call enan- tiomorphosis: a regime that involves a hieratic and immutable Master who at every moment legislates by constants, prohibiting or strictly limiting metamor- phoses, giving figures clear and stable contours, setting forms in opposition. (Deleuze and Guattari 1987: 107) The desiring term is made invisible. The desiring master desires precisely through extricating the self from the object of desire, in animal hybrid sexuality, clearly the master of the animal or the subjugator of the cure fluffy, the parent of the Oedipal dog – hybridity as dissymmetry. Monsters offer examples of unnatural participatory hybridity. Monsters are not metaphors but vibrate as bands or inflections of inten- sities. Deleuze and Guattari use the examples of vampires and were- wolves. Werewolves elicit the becomings of others as themselves always and already hybrids, bitten and biting, transferring their becomings to others through desiring experiences. Enantiomorphosis collapses to effectuation. Werewolves come through two trajectories – the wolf as animal and the wolf as part of a pack. The wolf is not the form of a wolf, or the wolf as belonging to the taxonomy of the animal kingdom. Unnatural participations are interkingdom becomings, ‘the wolf is not fundamentally a characteristic or a certain number of characteristics; it is a wolfing’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1987: 239). The werewolf is part of a pack but is itself a pack as already contagion entity, infected, able to infect – molecular within and without. Simultaneously the werewolf is not a whole, neither man nor beast, but not referring in the least to an organism that would function phantasmatically as a lost unity or totality to come. Their dispersion has nothing to do with a lack, and constitutes their mode of presence in the multiplicity they form without unification or totalization. (Deleuze and Guattari 1996: 324) As becomings never become, so one never becomes a vampire or were- wolf but constantly oscillates between and within variable intensities created uniquely at the encounter. The vampire is a rare monster in that the victim’s desire compels them toward a welcome and ecstatic death, an active victim open to infection. The vampire is seductive and dan- gerous, recruiting victims who desire differently into a pack. The sexual dialectic proliferates, against sexual structuration – hetero or homo – the vampire’s victims victimise themselves, not desiring the vampire as a creature necessarily but desiring the infection or plague. The victim seeks the transformation and proliferation of the desiring self. The vampire infects the victim in order that the victim can deterritorialise their own molar sexuality toward molecular desires and pleasures. The spectre of the lesbian vampire in literature and film testifies to the horrors of a monster not being predatory but compelling, met less with terror than fascination. The lesbian vampire is not scary but sexy, usually requiring intervention by not heterosexuality but phallocentric discursive systems – religion and science – to cure the victim. Lesbian vampires conflate sexual aberration with biological disease. Desire for vampires and vampire desire celebrate or ignore the pain of the death of the organism, part of a genealogy or a kind, and births the hybrid which is unable to reproduce and thus neither belongs to one kingdom nor one sexual structure. Vampires invoke queer as an inflection or dissipation of desiring self before and beyond act or object. Vampires are able to transform into animals. Obviously in many myths and novels the vampire becomes wolf, expressing Deleuze and Guattari’s point that both are parts of bands that transform themselves and each other, a kind of monstrous or hybrid interkingdom beyond natural kingdoms, unnatural-unnatural participa- tion, emphasising the infinity of interkingdom participations. The vampire becomes the bat, in Leviticus a forbidden and aberrant animal because of its interkingdom associations as both bird and mammal. Each example of a vampire and werewolf transformation creates a new hybrid – the colonisation through infection of each term by its animal and human qualities teems with new nodes and pulsations as various intensities cross each other for the first time, or the next time, where dif- ferent molecules meet familiarly or as strange combinations. Werewolves and vampires are not monsters as spectacle forms but events. The wolf, essentially always part of a pack, infects through the bite. The mouth as site of consumption is deterritorialised, now the site of the bite, the animal kiss that expresses rather than incorporates. The mouth – more correctly the jaw or snout, fanged to infect, not to kill or eat – accesses the molecules of the ‘victim’. The form is not eaten, killed or attacked, the mouth-snout creates a vacuum which mingles molecules, invoking becomings as the victim dissipates its cell-intensities to itself propagate as teeming pack of new formations, constantly mobile and thus con- stantly transforming. If nature anchors on reproduction, reifying geneal- ogy and repetition as reiteration, the infective bite of the werewolf or vampire creates the hybrid that is ‘sterile, born of a sexual union that will not reproduce itself but which begins over again every time’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1987: 241). Deleuze and Guattari emphasise these ‘animals’ are not kinds but states (1987: 243). In myth and literature vampires also transform into fog. Fog is made of molecules, it is inapprehensible, breathed into lungs, obscuring sight, creating an in-between myopia or twilight perception, the time of vampire transformation in the evening and werewolf metamorphosis in the morning (traditionally 4 a.m. is the ‘wolfing hour’). Fog seeps into animal, vegetable, mineral and ether. Ubiquitous fog invokes other kinds of hybrid monsters which begin as hyper-interkingdom animals and eventually other-universe and other- physics entities and collectives. Deleuze and Guattari use the work of H. P. Lovecraft to exemplify the interkingdom propagation beyond mammalian, animal, vegetable and carbon-based participations. ‘Lovecraft applies the term “outsider” to this thing or entity, the Thing which arrives and passes at the edge . . . “teeming, seething, swelling, foaming, spreading like an infectious disease, this nameless horror”’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1987: 245). Guattari emphasises that ‘desire is always “outside” ’ (Guattari 1996: 59). Lovecraft’s monster hybrid has gone beyond an unnatural participation to transform the entity as con- tagion itself. Walter Gilman in Lovecraft’s Dreams in the Witch house is frightened by the human-demon-rat creature which scuttles around his house. Consequently this half-half hybrid is replaced by conical multi- armed entities and bubble-foaming entities which converge and diverge. And they live in his house with him, forming a very unnatural family indeed. The ‘families’ of Innsmouth in The Shadow Over Innsmouth have bred with the fish-frog creatures beneath the sea. The resulting flesh- fish-frog-humans are able to reproduce both with each other and with the fish-frogs, but each is unique – their reproduction results in entities but these offspring never resemble their genesis. Each citizen of Innsmouth is a unique and unrecognisable singularity. These are exam- ples of queer production without reproduction. Gender, sexual union, genus and non-dividuation do not prevent offspring but do prevent reproduction as repetition. Lovecraft eventually offers imperceptible entities, including the becoming-imperceptible of human characters such as Randolph Carter in The Statement of Randolph Carter, whose great hybrid form is that of the simultaneously conscious and mindless – not present to himself. Here the hybrid is estranged from itself. Especially in Lovecraft, other demons and gods emerge (Cthulhu, Nyarlahotep and such), evoking transformation rather than the empty simulacrum reiter- ations enforced through religion, capitalism and other regimes of desire which encroach on bodies and desire. Werewolves, vampires, flesh-fish-frog people, gender ambiguities and perverts are hybrid becomings. The focus here is on transformative potentialities or germinalities, interstices and qualities of each term and the unique vibrations produced as the specific intensities enter within each other. Contagion is movement, werewolves and vampires transform into melded thresholds, not symbolic half-and-halves. Deleuze and Guattari’s threshold collapses the analogous proportion gap rather than splicing the terms into two demarcated halves stuck onto each other. The unnatural alliance closes the gap of proportionality, whereby strange relations are created that challenge the like-for-like sets of binaries that are often used covertly to give some minoritarians power as long as they continue to oppress others, thus maintaining majoritarian power. In phallologocentric society women get equality as long as they don’t forget to stay women and don’t become ambiguous; homosexuality is ok but don’t let in the queers; ‘we’ treat animals better, enslaving them organi- cally but eating them just the same. Traditional relations demand the minoritarian come up to the dominant. Unnatural alliances are molecu- lar entrances into something else’s politics, desires, alliances that traverse proportion and proportionality rather than swap it or change places within the maintained hierarchy. A line of flight cuts across, not up or down, and thus its trajectory is hybrid as it doesn’t know the qualities of its journey. Transformation is not an act; the hybrid has no past, no birth born of a monstrous union or a collapse of two symbolic qualities. Female desire, implicit in becoming-woman, emphasises ‘the fantasy of the non-human status of woman as android, vampire, or animal, the identification of female sexuality as voracious, insatiable, enigmatic, invisible and unknowable, cold, calculating, instrumental, castrator/ decapitator of the male, dissimulatress or fake, predatory . . . ’ (Grosz 1995: 203). The werewolf never starts or ends wolf or man but con- stantly unfolds and reorients its werewolfish aspects and force. The vampire is a femme-male seductive-monster queer (it doesn’t have sex ‘normally’), infecting (most often) women with lesbianism simultane- ously with the disease of vampirism. Perhaps this example of lesbianism conceived as vampiristic contagion offers an entry for non-lesbians into the becoming-woman through which all women themselves must pass? The lesbian vampire has created a genre of monster all of her own. If les- bians are not women, perhaps lesbian vampires are not vampires, but yet another becoming-term toward which we can resonate. Lovecraft’s Innsmouth folk and the non-Euclidian elder gods are monsters without genealogy or destiny and are to varying degrees imperceptible while nonetheless being present and affective. Perhaps I could suggest that these new gods which demand a forsaking of regimes transform sexual- ity to mystical desire: ‘sexual liberation is a mystification . . . liberation will occur when sexuality becomes desire, and desire is the freedom to be sexual, that is, to be something else at the same time’ (Guattari 1996: 56). This understanding of desire negotiates Foucault’s disdain for the concept of desire, which for him suggests ‘the medical and naturalist con- notations that the notion of desire entails . . . tell me what you desire and I will tell you who you are’ (Foucault 2000: 246). Hybrids are not nouns, but verbs. They are inherently unnatural and resist naturalisation because they cannot be placed within taxonomy – they move too fast and transform too quickly and, especially when they enter into imperceptible participations, cannot perceive themselves. ‘We’ as ‘they’ cannot speak a language that can be heard so we cannot tell, ergo cannot be. Because we are always singular instances we do not have a language of our own, only resonant sonorities with other entities. The medical and social study of aberrations – from congenital monsters to queers – could be resisted through a politics of hybridity, which requires the hybrid to be part of a pack that collects those who do not resemble each other. Deleuze and Guattari offer the following to exemplify pack as expansion: A Pack of wolfing-werewolf Wolves, a Swarm of cross genus non- mammalian Bees, a field of Anuses, a rhizomatic harvest deterritorialising the organised body. Collective nouns collect entities based not so much on their filiations but the desire to extricate them from forming unnatural par- ticipations with those belonging to different kingdoms. Collective nouns do not collect per se, their borders are infinite. Their instances are within rather than beyond. Collective nouns are created because collectives cannot be quarantined; they excavate the myth of purity of kingdoms and kinds. They are always within society, not alienated from it. A politics or ethics of hybridity requires a tentative individual volition toward a verbing not nouning, born of a need to mobilise majoritarian patterns, not be included within these patterns. Hybridity signs the pack pact, the tenets of which include willingness to repudiate the phantasy of purity of self, of sexuality as subjectivity, of biunivocal definition, of belonging to one kingdom. Hybridity is a permanent experiment that makes the self its own phylum, both always alone and also not known as self to self. Hybrids are made up of molecular intensities, many of which are unexpected, but some of which come from the initial desire toward becomings. These could be described as the political aspects of becomings. Entering into a hybridity involves losing the self in order to think through another trajectory in order to advocate political shifts in society without retaining the dialectic of advocate/victim (even if the advocate is the victim, which reifies the self as subject rather than as negotiating a condition of oppression). This is a key issue for Lyotard in his work on the differend, as he demands the turn from the individual and their capacity to speak for the victim or from their perspective on the victim – what Lyotard calls the ‘silences’. Guattari elaborates: It is not only species that are becoming extinct [itself an Oedipal crisis which laments types rather than lives] but also words, phrases and gestures of human solidarity. A stifling cloak of silence has been thrown over the eman- cipatory struggle of women . . . this is not simply due to the complexity of the entities under consideration but more fundamentally to the fact that [ecosophies] are governed by a different logic to that of ordinary communi- cation between speakers and listeners which has nothing to do with the intelligibility of discursive sets . . . it is a logic of intensities, of auto- referential existential assemblages engaging in irreversible durations . . . while the logic of discursive sets endeavours to completely delimit its object [both victim/other and advocate/desiring subject] the logic of intensities, or eco-logic, is concerned only with the movement and intensity of evolutive processes. (Guattari 2005: 44) There is a head of the pack, a demon with which we make the pack pact. The demon head is a queer entity, in reference to gender and sexual activ- ity, a monster who makes its partner a monster, a power of alliance inspiring illicit unions or abominable loves. This . . . tends to prevent procreation; since the demon does not himself [sic] have the ability to procreate, he must adopt indirect means (for example the female succubus of a man and then becoming the male incubus of a woman, to whom he transmits the male semen). (Deleuze and Guattari 1987: 246) Making a pack with the demon lover abominates us. We become sorcer- ers, who invoke their lovers rather than being part of a structure which limits their selections. ‘The sorcerer has a relation of alliance with the demon as the power of the anomalous’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1987: 246). The head of the pack/pact can be a specific intensity between more than one or born of a volatility within the head, but the head can only exist through the necessary potentiality of the pack and its shifting numbers, directions, dissipations and other intensities. Guattari would suggest that while dialectic advocacy, desire or infection is a transfer- ence – from molar man to molar wolf, from traditional hetero to nomen- clatured transgressive – an ecosophical creation of unnatural alliances are transversal – a mobile, teeming existential territory. A pack of wolves are all different and all the same at once. The monsters in Lovecraft cannot apprehend their own being as non-Euclidean physics is beyond traditional possibilities of perception. But they can apprehend the asso- ciations they have with their other-universe collectives. They have gods, which are demons with which they sign pacts that recruit them into the collective of those who have no common characteristics or filiations beyond what, politically, would be one intensity, not of shared quality but shared desire to decentre and dissipate aspects of systematics of desire. Like feminists, queers and political activists, these demonic assem- blages think, speak and live according to different logics or negotiative practices. They are being, doing and relating differently, an abstract machine. Explicitly this is not metaphoric but thought as material and materiality as thought. Packs think but they never know. They do not know themselves as individuals within a pack or a pack within the world, but their different thinking, or logic, activates change. The head, which could be a moment, an encounter with the head or an infection accord- ing to Deleuze and Guattari, elicits fascination (1987: 239–40). Monsters are fascinating, and create fascinating unnatural alliances through the formation of a relation between the fascinated and the monster, collaps- ing the dialectic into a hybrid – no escape, no line of flight that can be retraced or reversed. Fascination is an irreversible making-queer- assemblage. ‘This Real-Abstract is totally different from the fictitious abstraction of the supposedly pure machine of expression . . . Abstract machines thus have proper names (as well as dates), which of course designate not persons or subjects but matters and functions’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1987: 142). Can we use fascination as a term to negotiate desire as a longing for an entity without the possibility of desire being satisfied through a dialectic coupling with the entity? As psychoanalytic desire is to satisfaction is queer hybridity fascination to pact packing? The infective werewolf evokes both shared wolfing and irresolvable differences within the pack. The devil with which we make a pact/packed announces in the bible, and quoted by Deleuze and Guattari in A Thousand Plateaus, ‘I am legion’ (1987: 239). The enunciation continues ‘for we are many’. Animal-vegetable-imperceptible becomings require nothing more than other-form otherworldly pack perception. Advocacy demands a territory shifting function without resolution. And the queer infects and recruits to shift planes of desire which (arguably) necessarily change dialectics, forms and subjects anchored by gender, sexuality, desire and the demarcation between desire as sexuality and ‘everything else’, between the sacred and profane, the sexual and the secular, the act/object and flows. Deleuze and Guattari’s queerings function at the level of singularity and collectivity, of aesthetics and ethics. They make numerous references to literary texts. An aesthetic queering of singularities is accompanied by temporary manifestations of militantism that would help transform society. At no point do the philosophers simply want to integrate a gay population into the status quo of present society. Their work escapes much of the present discussions in the Anglo-Saxon world that takes as its point of departure the division between a desire for rights to estab- lished values – such as marriage – and of queering, that is, of making strange all of present society (Warner 1999). What can be called queer- ing in the texts of Deleuze and Guattari is predicated on a queer revolu- tion – sexual and social – and the becoming-revolutionary of the queer. It can be said that all of Deleuze’s writing with Guattari functions as a kind of homosexual experimentation. In addition, queering is addressed variously throughout their individual writings. We will see how such queering functions in the texts by Deleuze and Guattari and ask how we can read their theories today. Just as Derrida experimented with homosexuality through writers like Jean Genet, so Deleuze entered into becomings with Guy Hocquenghem, a gay French writer whom he met after 1968. It is in a preface to a novel by Hocquenghem, never translated into English, L’Après-Mai des faunes (Hocquenghem 1974) – a title that for a French reader bears unmistak- able literary references to Mallarmé – that Deleuze muses on homosexu- ality as queering. From the texts of an openly gay writer and activist influenced (among others) by Deleuze’s theory, the philosopher in turn elaborates on homosexuality as queering. Homosexual struggles are asso- ciated with the margins and a becoming-minoritarian. For Deleuze, homosexual identity does not exist. As is the case for other minorities, gay identity is always established by, or in connection with, a majority. To fix gay identity is to try to stabilise what has to be radically destabilised. It would be laughable to pretend to know even what gay identity is. Deleuze argues that homosexuals like other minorities – women, colonised people – have to question these identities and turn away from their own questioning in an ongoing fashion. They have to enter into a permanent revolution. In Hocquenghem, Deleuze finds a writer who searches not for a ‘gay identity’ or for ‘being-gay’ but for becoming gay. Since this becoming is linked to complex socio-historic structures, every book has to write it out in a different way. To become gay has to do first and foremost not with identity but with desire. Homosexual desire has to be distributed and mobilised otherwise from book to book. It is con- tinually transforming itself, and thus for Deleuze, there can be no pre- existing identity from which to transform oneself. There is only a label given by the majority that the gay person takes over. He – in the case of Hocquenghem – is both gay and not gay. He is in a constant becoming that goes through desire. Writing in the early 1970s, Deleuze develops a notion of ‘vitality’ as a liberation of desire. A dominant order stifles desire. It controls individ- ual and collective desire through institutions be it philosophy or, espe- cially, psychoanalysis. Deleuze argues against a psychoanalysis that ‘normalises’ the subject by reducing everything to an Oedipal scenario. As an institution, psychoanalysis normalises desire and excludes differ- ence. By doing so, it limits creativity. Psychoanalysis has recourse to inter- pretation and focuses on words. Deleuze argues for the necessity to introduce semiotic chains that would valorise not only words but other regimes, signifying and asignifying, such as gesture and sensation. Experimentation instead of a reductionist interpretation should support all forms of desire and not exclude gay practices the way Freud did when he classified them as ‘abnormal’. Queering as becoming has to reinstate a vital desire that experiments with innumerable sexualities. The homo- sexual is not fixated on his past but on the present and turned toward the future. He is in touch with invention and an opening of spaces. Deleuze discovers in Hocquenghem a homosexual desire that is not defined as ‘a regressive interiority but through an Outside, whose characteristics are present’ (Deleuze 2004: 285). The philosopher finds this in a special movement of cruising, a mode of encounter, exchangeability and mobil- ity of roles, even in a kind of betrayal against his own class, that is, that of men. In addition to desire, queering must produce utterances (énoncés). Deleuze makes it clear that to produce a real and not a capitalist pseudo- desire entails producing new utterances. It is a matter of undermining the order-word (that is, an utterance that bears an effect of authority or law) of a hegemony in an ongoing movement of becoming. To desire then is not to long for something but to produce new ways of feeling, perceiv- ing and conceiving. Gay people have to invent different ways of desiring that do not pre-exist. Just as women, for Deleuze, have to become more and more ‘woman’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1987), so then homosexuals have to become more and more homosexual. Deleuze brings forward a historical dimension when he declares that the production of utterances, enoncés, inserts difference in gay writers. ‘Of course, Hocquenghem does not sound like Gide, or Proust [. . .]: but style is politics – and so are gen- erational differences, and the different ways of saying ‘I’ [. . .]’ (Deleuze 2004: 285). For Deleuze, it is from this new style – that is, from a way of creating assemblages (agencements) – that homosexuality in the 1970s can produce utterances that do not carry or write on homosexuality. Such a gesture would put homosexuals back squarely into the majority. In order to be able to say something and to produce change, gays have to be part of a minority or, even more so, of a becoming minoritarian. Only in that capacity can they escape a hypocritical, normativising majority. Gays have to make pronouncements on sexuality itself and de-normativise it. At the same time, their critique has to bear on the entire social field. By escaping the heterosexual model and the localisation of this model, gays can be leading a micropolitics of desire that changes what organises, dominates and represses all of society including military organisations. In this ongoing queering, homosexuality truly liberates itself, Deleuze concludes, when, by being marginal, it has ‘no social utility whatsoever’ (Deleuze 2004: 286, emphasis in text). A utilitarian model tends to be exploitative and thus, being close to capital, disables real desire. Relations of force, often expressed in couples such as man-woman, straight-gay, master-slave, have to be made unstable and reversible. The lack of usefulness makes of these couplings something aesthetic, inven- tive, without a ‘project’. To be ‘useful’, would be tantamount to entering into an existing society defined by hierarchies of categories and domi- nant, often expressive desire. To break with it one cannot enter into it but think its Outside. With echoes of Michel Foucault and through his work on gay writing Deleuze shows how Hocquenghem cannot be content with putting oneself in the margin but one has to go on to undo the ‘nominalism’ of homosexuality. For Deleuze – and Guattari – language exists only as a dominant order. It is not communication but prescription. Language is the centre that invents the margin and not vice-versa. This spatial order- ing defined by centres and margins is a recent invention in history and cannot be naturalised as ‘having always existed’ (Deleuze 2004: 286). It is a question, for Deleuze, of undoing homosexuality as a ‘state of things’. When homosexuality is a word, it has to be taken literally, pris au mot (Deleuze 2004: 286). Deleuze quotes, not without inserting a slight crit- ical distance, Hocquenghem’s own neo-Hegelian remarks: ‘It is by making shame all the more shameful that we progress’ (Deleuze 2004: 286–7). Praising the fact that FHAR (Front homosexuel d’action révolution- naire), the group Hocquenghem helped found, explored its relations with other minoritarian movements, such as the MLF (Mouvement de libera- tion des femmes), Deleuze argues against the closure of a group on itself. A collective group has to connect with others, evolve and even disband without sadness or nostalgia. Of importance is the avoidance of sclerosis, that is, of repetition of the same. By way of Hocquenghem, Deleuze insists on a homosexuality that will open itself up ‘to all sorts of possible new relations, micro-logical or micro-psychic, essentially reversible, transver- sal relations with as many sexes as there are assemblages (agencements), without even excluding new relations between men and women: the mobility of particular S&M relations, the potency of cross-dressing, Fourier’s thirty-six thousand forms of love, or the n-sexes (neither one nor two sexes)’ (Deleuze 2004: 287). Deleuze recalls how Proust already advocated a ‘multiple homosexuality’ that would include transsexual communications with flowers and bicycles. He praises in Hocquenghem the allusion to a homosexual ‘transmutation’ that would not be interme- diary but a part of a world transferred into and onto another. This trans- mutation is what Deleuze and Guattari describe elsewhere in relation to the wasp and the orchid as ‘a capture of code, [. . .], a veritable becom- ing [. . .]. The two becomings interlink and form relays in a circulation of intensities pushing deterritorialisation further’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1987: 10). Homosexual becomings function in similar ways. Queering is not based on recognition in a dialectic. For Deleuze no homosexual subject clamours for rights. Rather, the ‘new’ homosexual affirms himself or herself by saying that no one is homosexual. Homosexuals are still being named as such by a majority in power but they are already elsewhere. There are only homosexual productions of desire and assemblages (agencements) that produce utterances (énoncés). Deleuze makes it clear that in the 1970s divided-subjects à la Gide or even guilt-ridden subjects à la Proust are of times past. Queering implies a specific homosexual desire with homosexual utterances. One has to go back through a deeper and broader history of homosexuality to give it back all the otherness it contains and of which it had been stripped. This cannot be found in an unconscious elaborated by a repressive, official psychoanalysis but only through the progression of a sexual becoming that is always to come. Deleuze elaborates these forms of homosexual desire and becoming in a post-1968 climate that is under the sign of a vital desire and a cultural revolution that condemns the state, state thought and its representatives, the school, the family or the law. Any utilitarian project is also associated with the state. In 1993, in his preface to a new English edition to Hocquenghem’s earlier text, Homosexual Desire, first published in France in 1972, Michael Moon writes about the proximity between the French gay writer and poststructuralist theory without mentioning Deleuze’s preface to a later book. He puts Hocquenghem squarely in the ferment of the 1960s and provides provocative historical minutiae of this romanticised and bygone period. The numerous details about provocation and activism that often invited police action bring forth a side of Hocquenghem and his group, FHAR, that complement the analytical part of Deleuze. However, Moon’s essay testifies to the blatantly militant involvement of many leading French intellectuals – Deleuze and Guattari included – in gay activism. Moon writes: Further writings of FHAR members were gathered and published in a book, Rapport contre la Normalité (1971, Report against Normality), as well as in a special issue of the journal Recherches (March 1973). Calling itself a ‘Grande Encyclopédie des Homosexualités’, and boasting a long roster of ‘participants’ that included not only such gay-lib stalwarts as Hocquenghem and Pierre Hahn but also Sartre, Michel Foucault, Gilles Deleuze and Jean Genet, the issue included a piece on ‘schizo-sodomy’ illustrated with Tom of Finland drawings and gay sex graffiti, a thoughtful meditation on the desire of the American comic-strip character Dennis the Menace, a transcription of a long discussion among three young French men about their sexual relations with Arab men and boys, and a foldout cartoon entitled ‘La puissance ou la Jouissance?’ (‘Power or [Sexual] Pleasure’). This special issue of Recherches was also seized, and Félix Guattari, its nominal editor, was fined 600 francs for this latest ‘outrage against public decency’ by the FHAR and their sup- porters on the intellectual left. (Moon in Hocquenghem 1993: 12–13) Whether for his outrageousness or his theoretical elaborations that refuse to take gay identity as a point of departure, Hocquenghem who is close to, and inspired by, Deleuze never became very popular in the Anglo-Saxon world. His sense of queering as becoming was ill received or understood by gay theorists who like to insist on identity and gay pride and who often draw a dividing line between queering and rights. It can be said though that Deleuze – as well as Hocquenghem – wrote about homosexuals and becoming in terms similar to many feminists of the same period. Both pay close attention to language and advocate the destabilisation of self and identity. The difficulties with ‘trap words’ such as homosexual but also lesbian and woman, were discussed and denounced by many feminist writers at the time as well. Monique Wittig who, in her writings, put these words into metamorphosis, has recourse to a kind of queering in Les Guérillères (1979). Later, she argues that ‘woman’ has always been thought from a phallocentric male point of view and therefore lesbians are not women (Wittig 1992). In The Newly Born Woman, Hélène Cixous insisted on de-emphasising trap words such as ‘man’ and ‘woman’ because of their historical sedimentation. She found salvation in an unlimited exchange as gift and the replacement of nouns with adjectives, ‘masculine’ and ‘feminine’ and even attributes of colour. Deleuze’s queering as becoming goes beyond homosexuality – though it does not complicate the latter – to include all minorities, to begin with women who insist on changing language in an effort to trans- form a capitalist, disciplinary society and its institutions. As has already become amply evident, one cannot think about Deleuze’s pronouncements on queering without evoking Guattari, his intercessor. Guattari advocates the necessity of becoming and desire in words that are similar to and even more openly politicised than those of Deleuze. He too underlines the necessity to transform all of society. In Révolution moléculaire (Guattari 1977), in a section on ‘faire fuir’, to make flee, to put into flight, he entitles one of the sub-sections – not included in the English translation – Molecular Revolution: Psychiatry and Politics, ‘Devenir enfant, voyou, pédé,’ ‘Becoming child, rogue, faggot’ (Guattari 1984: 170).1 The sub-title is provocative and not without shock value, both through its choice and its myriad association of other words. Guattari wants to produce lines of flight and advocate transversal thinking that move beyond the limits. Words like child, voyou (rogue) or the more derogatory pédé (fag) for ‘homosexual’ – used by Deleuze – have to be put in flight. To become, they have to be subjected to a generalised queering that would take a ‘bad’ word and transform it even further. A majority established these words as categories and binary oppositions that control the ways a social body thinks of its milieu. They have to be disconnected from the group in which they were imprisoned. In the parlance of Guattari, they have to be put in flight and their desire liberated so that the child, the voyou or the pédé can become. These words, when taken literally, will become in ways unknown to the major- ity. They will be carried off in a becoming-minoritarian. The child can free him or herself from a reductionist and constraining Oedipal sce- nario. Similarly, the rogue or gang leader – with direct echoes of the Black Panthers – whom Guattari sees somewhat romantically as struggling for social justice, and the homosexual who had been labelled abnormal can now invent their flights. This majority cannot be thought outside socio-historic power forma- tions that are sexual and economic. Already in 1977 Guattari senses an impending shift toward an increasing consumer society that is about to channel desire in ways that reinforce a voluntary servitude: ‘In fact, people serve only to enframe, to “channel” – in the sense of information theory – a process of semiotisation that, increasingly, goes through tele- vision, cinema, records, comic strips, etc., without assembling such machinic processes according to collectively assumed finalities; one ends up with a kind of generalised, semiotic intoxication’ (Guattari 1984: 171–2). More as an analyst than a sociologist, Guattari shows how people are ‘mentally equipped’ (172) so that they perform certain tasks and agree willingly to conform to social organisations. Their egos are modelled by unconscious representations that enter in complicity with repressive dominant formations. To this, Guattari opposes ‘a collective assemblage of the social that no longer looks to make people enter into pre-established frames in order to make them adapt to universal and eternal finalities but that accepts the finite and historically delimited aspect of human enterprises’ (172). He, like Deleuze, introduces a historical dimension in his thinking on becom- ing ‘pédé.’ He orients a liberation of a desiring energy such as the desire to live from institutions into an assemblage (agencement) of people, of functions, of economic and social relations toward a generalised politics of liberation (173). In the wake of communism he continues to argue that the entirety of the social compact has to search for new ways of being in common. He sees this happening in 1977 with an increasing awareness of a transversality, of problems such as urbanism, bureaucracy, neurosis, micropolitics in the family and, last but not least, in ecology. It is not only specialists who should militate but all of society should bring about a shift in what he will later call an ongoing transformation of sensibility, desire and intelligence (Guattari 2000). One should not apply readymade methods but become analytically militant. Guattari argues for a contin- uum between theory, practice and militantism. A constructivist, he wants to build something living, not only with one’s family members but with friends, militants and oneself. Everyone has to transform the relations with their own body and with themselves. As Deleuze puts it in his preface to his friend’s Psychanalyse et transversalité, Guattari is not pre- occupied with the unity of a self (moi). Rather, the self is something that has to be dissolved under the double assault of political forces (Guattari 1972, my translation). For Guattari, there are not two economies, one libidinal and another political. There are only flows of desire that are one and the other (Guattari 1972). To those who interject that this is not a revolution, he answers that it is a question of a different revolution. It’s a question of ending all forms of alienation, those of workers, women, children, sexual minorities, atypical sensibilities, the love of sounds, colours, ideas. What Guattari continues to call a ‘revolution’ in whatever domain, goes through a preliminary liberation of an energy of desire (Guattari 1972: 175). Only something transversal and a chain reaction that goes through the existing stratifications will catalyse an irreversible process of calling in question the power formations to which the present society is enchained. Guattari takes his own discipline to task. Focusing on the limit between normal and pathological, psychoanalysis has entered a political field. It is part of a capitalist system of production established according to these norms and serves as a model for life and desiring. Psychoanalysis tries to structure itself according to scientific models from biology to lin- guistics; it has even sought refuge in literary activity. The problem is that psychoanalysis thinks its practices are in collusion with dominant models of power and goes against liberating desire. It takes over and frames human beings from birth on. Having relayed in the social domain reli- gious and philosophical quarrels of other times, it has become hegemonic and aims at controlling madness, dreams, deviations, art, history, even occurrences in the everyday such as a slip of the tongue (245–6). In the dominant society of 1974, every non-meaning has to be interpreted and homosexuality is classified as perversion. It is explained as a fixation at an infantile stage, that is, a pre-genital or polymorphic stage. This is how, under the guise of an objective description, ‘a normal desire is imposed that disqualifies that of the child, the homosexual, the mad person and, closely related, that of woman and of a young person who has not fully accepted the conjugalo-familial perspective, etc.’ (246). Revolutionary struggle has to do away with dominant models and, especially, the model of models – capital – that reduces desiring multi- plicities into an undifferentiated flux of workers and consumers. To do away with struggles based on binary oppositions one has to recognise the plural character of desiring commitments, of possible hyphens between revolts and revolutions. Such a struggle would have to take into consid- eration minorities of all kinds without prior normative rules. For such a conversion to happen, one has to be rid of psychoanalytic models of repression based on Oedipal scenarios and castration. No struggle will be possible that does not focus on desire. Desire is made captive by psy- choanalysis in the service of capitalism that opposes a dangerous subjec- tive desire and a rational self on the side of reality with which one has to negotiate (247). For Guattari, a desire liberated from power is more real than the delirious rationalism of planners. As long as there exist no micro-politics that introduce shifts in an official desire, one cannot but repeat the same model and, as a result, no liberation is possible for minorities. In a short section, ‘Becoming Woman’ – included in the English translation – that follows the one on ‘pédés and voyous’, fags and rogues, Guattari explains why he coined the contested expression, ‘becoming woman’. As the prototype of a minority and insofar as she enters into dominant binaries between man, woman, such as strong, weak, rich, poor, active, passive, she also has the opportunity of escap- ing the dominant order and of entering into becoming. This is the case for woman as a sexual body, not as a social body. The latter, caught as she is in society by marriage and maternity, has forfeited that chance. As the prototype of becoming, woman as sexual body can inspire homo- sexuals and other minorities to become. This kind of becoming is only open to those who are outside of any category. For Guattari, the focus is placed on the micro-politics of desire. Critical of the emphasis structuralism places on the signifier, he declares that language is always shaped by a specific social and political model. The social field is not determined by an economic infrastructure, nor is the semantic field by a signifying structure. To analyse and change complex socio-historic structures one has to put in question myriad forms of power that control the social fields at all levels. Those in power order the rights of the person as well as categories of race and sex, and age groups. Yet even before language, there exists a multitude of micro- political levels. This is why it is all-important for a micro-politics to intervene in power and change dominant significations (241–2). Micro- politics help transform sexual minorities as long as one does not distin- guish between objectivity and subjectivity (248). To an interpretation with words, Guattari opposes experimentation with ‘signs, machinic functions, assemblages of things and people’ (248). For Guattari, the undoing of the self comes with an emphasis on desire, a politics that thinks across disciplines and a micro-politics that precedes language. A transformation of homosexuals cannot come about without simultane- ous undoing of state power for which an ongoing experimentation with people, things and machines is tantamount. When writing about homosexuals Deleuze and Guattari were intensely aware of doing so in a time of what they called a generalised becoming-minoritarian. Both knew they were writing, as they had argued for subjectivity in general, in a world in ongoing transformation. Guattari was continually rewriting his texts in order to deterritorialise them according to changing socio-historical contexts. The world of their published reflections – as we can read in the preface of Michael Moon – is no longer ours today. We may wonder how Deleuze and Guattari would rewrite their notions of becoming as queering today. With an even greater intensification of capital, most women and gays have bought into capitalism, the supreme order to which, at this point, as Etienne Balibar notes elsewhere, no organised resistance is possible. Already Guattari showed how many gays constitute themselves as ‘corpo- rate groups’. Gay desire – like that of many other groups – has been recuperated by capitalism. It has become a cottage or even a consumer industry. In spite of this appropriation, a noticeable and ongoing trans- formation of sensibility, desire and intelligence is witnessed due in no small part to micro-politics. Some of the rhetoric of the FHAR, such as the touting of sexual encounters with Arab boys, or Guattari’s romanti- cisation of street gangs, ruffles sensibilities today. It also strikes a con- temporary reader as strange that Deleuze and Guattari carry on an almost masculinist and homogenising discourse by focusing on homo- sexuals and pédés exclusively without any mention of lesbians, bisexu- als or transsexuals. In the United States, since the 1970s, that is, since the time when Deleuze and Guattari wrote the texts quoted above, sig- nificant transformation has taken place both in the way gays relate to themselves and the way others relate to them. Psychiatry has modified its stance that treated homosexuality as abnormality; now popular culture displays more of a gay sensibility on television, film and video, all the while the demand for rights, though often denied, is never aban- doned. With AIDS, the importance of freeing the energy of desire, of becoming and reinventing the term through experimentation and the creation of new assemblages has, if not disappeared, at least lost some of its momentum. In a way, both the philosopher and the analyst are close to some of the pronouncements of Judith Butler and Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick who draw inspiration from poststructuralist theory. From Bodies that Matter to Undoing Gender and elsewhere Butler makes clear that homosexual ‘identity’ is a mirage. It is always imposed by a dominant social order. Of importance for her is the need to re-signify words and to reinvent identity – or identities – in ongoing fashion. As Deleuze writes, Hocquenghem does not say I the way Gide or even Proust did. Butler and others insist on the necessity of reconciling a certain desire and re-signification with rights. Today’s society is no longer that in which Deleuze and Guattari wrote their essays on queering and that the media, celebrating a forty-year anniver- sary, re-signify in consumerist terms as the ‘summer of love’ through appeal to the anniversary of Sergeant Pepper’s Lonely Heart Club band. With the waning of the state and its institutions, repressions no longer function the same way. The scourge of AIDS has made distant memory of the anti-establishment buzz words of the 1960s; communication is no less affected by globalisation, the withering of the state, electronic transmis- sion and the undoing of many traditionally symbolic boundaries. Deleuze and Guattari were keenly aware of some of these impending transforma- tions. They were also aware of an intensification of capitalism that exploits strategies of marketing to spell a waning of desire as it was written about in the 1960s, the moment when the slogan was ‘Puissance ou Jouissance’, ‘Power or Sexual Pleasure’. Today, when – often as a result of consumerism – essences have been replaced with social conventions. Subjects and citizens have asked for the right to dwell, to move, to be, to represent, to speak. Other rights are being added, such as the right to experiment with institutions – the right to marriage, adoption, benefits, the right to ‘come out’ in institutions like the military – and to explore homosexual, lesbian, bisexual, transsexual desires and a generalised queering. For this we can recall Guattari’s exhortation to be analytically militant. The terms are held in an unstable relation. The militant does not follow a pre-traced party line. He or she invents and experiments instead of interpreting what already exists. We are far from the context in which Deleuze and Guattari wrote on homosexuality and queering. However, it is productive to think of the stress they placed on desire to change society. Some of it has been accom- plished. There prevails a new sensibility, a new desire, even a new intelli- gence that functions transversally, across many disciplines that range from urban planning to education, art, even fashion and food. All of these can implement novel forms of subjectivation. Yet desire today goes for the most part through forms of global capitalism that produce, as Deleuze and Guattari insist, stupendous quantities of misery. We pay attention to words in a sexual context but not to how they are structured by a social- economic discourse. Minorities become majorities and enter the discourse of marketing. We forget the words of Guattari to the effect that in capi- talism economic and sexual flows are of the same currency. Queering risks taking place more at the level of a pseudo-desire that does not, as in the texts of Deleuze and Guattari, search for sexual and social becomings. We should not, however, in Guattari’s terms, mummify the philosopher and the analyst’s theories. Rather, we should ‘open them up onto further con- structions that are just as provisional, but more firmly grounded in the solid earth of experience. What matters, in the last resort, is how a theory is used’ (Guattari 1984: 253). In spite of a certain romanticism and utopi- anism associated with their thirty-six thousand forms of love, Deleuze and Guattari’s exhortations to rethink our desires and direct them away from existing power structures in order to change the latter can make us think and dream less of missed opportunities than of future becomings. Not to mention lifestyles and sexual pleasure. It seems almost as if Deleuze and Guattari would have women dump their girl- friends and fuck chairs outdoors in order to affect a flow in which ‘non- human sex mingles with the flowers’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1983: 319). While we do not think this is the kind of social action schizoanalysis calls for, we do want to grapple with the work of Judith Butler to offer a located way of thinking ‘queer’ in relation to Deleuze and Guattari. Deleuze and Guattari understand much about the politics of produc- ing subjectivity: we often create psychoanalytic types in ourselves. We submit to myth as a form of social control. As little factories of myth reproduction, we are the new Ophelia: women who want to marry our mothers, men who desire union with the Father. We re-invent thousands of Hamlet and Oedipus Rex complexes. Butler asserts the difficulty of moving beyond such a double-bind in which the subject is an effect of a set of laws that precede it: psychoanalytic, mythic, tragic, cultural laws – laws which are re-invented and re-imagined across generations. In the introductory quote above, Butler reminds us that an answer is not always to be found by looking beyond the subject. What Butler is saying here is that it is important to both work with the notion of the subject and, at the same time, to be able to look beyond the subject. In emphasising the importance of working within and beyond the subject, Butler draws on her own approach, which intends to work the legacy of humanism against itself. She then contrasts her approach to Latour and Haraway’s approaches, which emphasise a trans-human agency, especially in their use of the term ‘actor’ and their focus on exchanges within networks. There are parallels here with schizoanalysis: in which the schizoanalyst is an agent that effects productive flows beyond the increasingly person- alised limits of capitalism. In creating space for such resonances to be dis- cussed, this chapter identifies select schizoanalytic elements in Butler’s work and makes room for further encounters between Deleuze and Butler. Deleuze and Guattari deterritorialise psychoanalytic ideas, while Butler reworks them; both want to craft sexual subjectivities that refute majoritarian readings of gender and sexuality. These projects have many forms of cultural and political utility; to our minds the modes of resis- tance they generate need not follow one path. For Deleuze and Guattari, crafting sexual subjectivities contrary to majoritarian ideas of gender and sexuality is a means of folding the social field and libidinal investments of groups into practices that distort and disfigure capitalist modes of production. But simultaneously we must reckon with the tendency of capitalism to re-code escaping flows. The personal isn’t just political: it’s marketable. The exercise of folding the social field and libidinal invest- ments of groups into daily life in ways that decode and deterritorialise capitalism and associated Imaginary structures is one of the tasks of schizoanalysis. We can understand this call to intervene in interfaces of capitalist production and subjective desire as a broad impetus of the schizoanalytic project. They explain: . . . decoding and the deterritorialisation of flows define the very process of capitalism – that is, its essence, its tendency, and its external limit. But we know that the process is continually interrupted, or the tendency counter- acted, or the limit displaced, by subjective reterritorialisations that operate as much at the level of capital as a subject (the axiomatic), as at the level of the person’s serving as capital’s agents (application of the axiomatic). (Deleuze and Guattari 1983: 320) We can intervene in the economies of value created by capitalism, one of which is the value accorded to sexual reproduction and heterosexual family units. Possibilities for schizoanalytic political intervention are found in making a productive, new whole from an assorted collection of parts. Libidinal economies need to be re-worked and re-channelled, as an answer to the question: What are your desiring machines, what do you put into these machines, what is the output, how does it work, what are your nonhuman sexes? (Deleuze and Guattari 1983: 322) A queer schizoanalysis realises what we ‘put into’ desiring machines is already a combination of autopoetic structures that maintain investment in deconstructing, or reconstructing, heteronormative ideas. Such aware- ness makes plain the constructed and binary foundation of heteronor- mative ideas. Secondly, our intention is to make new machinations of desire that rework, inspire and feed back into queer aesthetic, political, sexual and philosophical practices. We are not convinced that studying ‘nonhuman sexes’, on their own, is an entirely useful way of thinking through ‘. . . our desiring machines, [and] what [we] put into these machines’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1983: 322), what their output is and how they work. We insist that queer theorising about the ethics and aes- thetics of humanity and sexuality is an area that continues to require much attention. We argue in favour of the enduring importance of study- ing the desiring machines that produce/regulate our sexual identity, our experience of sexual pleasure and the social significance of sex. Our chapter responds to the tensions outlined above: between, on the one hand, the political impetus for fleeing from psychological and sexual types, and on the other hand, the need to engage with, and harness the political utility of, embodied ways in which such flight is incorporated into lived subjects. That is, to re-think the ways in which tropes of sexed being become part of the fabric of our subjectivities in ways difficult to escape. We examine selected resonances between the work of Butler (1993, 1997) and possibilities for deterritorialising or destratifying the heteronormative sexual subject presented by the work of Deleuze and Guattari (Deleuze 1991, 1995; Deleuze and Guattari 1983, 1987). As we note above, Deleuze and Guattari are renowned for their scathing cri- tiques of psychoanalysis – yet Butler takes up psychoanalytic concepts in her consideration of sexual subjectivity. Such differences in conceptual tools, and in the ontological frameworks of desire that these respective theorists mobilise, are two of several grounds that have informed a con- temporary culture of scholarship that considers Deleuze and Butler to be antithetical. In this chapter we do not dispute such fundamental onto- logical differences, but we question the utility of opposing strategic unions between these theorists. Why can’t we use Butler with Deleuze to create new possibilities for queer theory? Indeed, there are resonances in the meta-textual politics of DeleuzoGuattarian theory and Butler’s sexed subjectivity that deserve consideration. With a view to furthering such inquiry, the authors explore possibilities for certain types of critically queer unions between Butler, and the joint work of Deleuze–Guattari. Such unorthodox unions echo the Deleuzian methodology of practis- ing ‘philosophy as a sort of buggery or (it comes to the same thing) immaculate conception’ (Deleuze 1995: 6). One such union, in thought, or on a plane of immanence, might involve Butler’s concept of the lesbian phallus, taking concepts created by Deleuze–Guattari from behind, and generating queer theory for the new millennium. We recognise that Deleuze and Guattari’s work offers valuable methods for leaving behind renderings of queer theory preoccupied with being anti straight and non-normative, and which seem incapable of decentring the subject. One such example of Deleuze–Guattari inspired queer theorising is Mark Graham’s study of the relationships between bodies and things (Graham 2004), a study which assumes ‘a clear bound- ary between objects and persons must be abandoned and that persons do not finish at their skins’ (2004: 299). Graham conceives of a sexuality removed from the constraints of ‘oedipal imperatives and heterosexist assumptions about the gendered nature of sexuality’. Such an approach demonstrates the limitations of not taking sexual assemblages seriously enough (2004: 302), through illustrating that such assemblages extend beyond individual identity. Gender and sex are of the world, not just the person. This sentiment is exemplified by Deleuze and Guattari’s (1983: 293) statement that: ‘The truth is that sexuality is everywhere: the way a bureaucrat fondles his records, a judge administers justice, a business- man causes money to circulate; the way the bourgeoisie fucks the prole- tariat; and so on.’ We see value in Deleuzian inspired queer theory to the extent that it prompts an awareness of the degree to which sexuality and sexual poli- tics are part of everyday life. We are disturbed by a lack of generosity within Deleuze Studies towards Butlerian inspired queer theory; a senti- ment somewhat evident in the editors’ drive to develop a post-Butlerian queer theory founded upon a ‘new image of thought outside that of rep- resentation: a material thinking-image which will be able to provide the term “queer” with an active (that is, productive and positive) rather than a reactive force (queer as the negative, the anti-straight, the non- normative, an exclusively deconstructive practice)’. We are not sold on the chorus that suggests: You’ve got to accentuate the positive Eliminate the negative?Latch on to the affirmative?Don’t mess with Mister-In-Between. Rather, we argue the utility of theorising in the company of Deleuze and Butler, coupling the negative and the affirmative, messing with Mister-In- Between. In her essay ‘The End of Sexual Difference’ (2004: 195) Butler consid- ers Braidotti’s ‘Metamorphosis’. She agrees with Braidotti’s diagnosis that her work might be situated within a ‘theology of lack’, a lack pre- occupied with ‘melancholy, mourning, conscience, guilt and terror’. She dryly suggests that ‘this is what happens when a Jewish girl with a Holocaustal psychic inheritance sits down to read philosophy at an early age, especially when she turns to philosophy from violent circumstances’. While Butler accedes to being a ‘theologian of lack’, we wonder if queer theory will be as useful in the absence of lack. What is lost when ‘the the- ology of lack’ is regarded merely as ‘a reactive force’? Lack produces much as it is a response to a given state of affairs. Lack is part of a million different desiring machines that produce new material forms. With this in mind, we argue for a positive engagement with the possibilities afforded by lack and a re-assessment of approaches to theorising lack. Contemporary queer theory needs to think about what ‘lack’ does, to trace the trajectories in thought that lack effects and to affirmatively claim the usefulness of lack as a concept. Queer theorising inspired by Deleuze and Guattari would benefit if it refused to jettison the located and embodied notions of agency developed by Judith Butler. We contend that the binary opposition between Deleuze and Butler is becoming a ‘habit of thought’2 (Deleuze and Guattari 1996: 105–6): a knee-jerk reaction or affective response that prohibits any the- oretical union between these theorists. Deleuze and Guattari (1996: 106) articulate the relationship between concepts and habits in thought stating: Wherever there are habits there are concepts, and habits are developed and given up on the plane of immanence of radical experience: they are ‘con- ventions’. That is why English philosophy is a free and wild creation of con- cepts. To what convention is a given proposition due; what is the habit that constitutes its concept? This is the question of pragmatism. Habits have concepts. The habitual practice of reading Deleuze against Butler needs to be re-worked through the development of new concepts. The ontological divide between Butler and Deleuze is a ballast around the neck of contemporary thinkers who are concerned with the prob- lematics of gender, sexuality and agency as articulated in political sub- jectivities. Feminist scholars with an interest in sexual subjectivities, for example, see the earlier works of Braidotti (1991), Grosz (1994) and Jardine (1985), have found Deleuze’s work problematic, partially because his ontology is not easily mapped over existing knowledge struc- tures. While grounded in critical political projects, such misgivings have somewhat impeded positive encounters between Deleuze’s work and feminist studies of sexed subjectivity. Recent forays into queer theory have effected more productive unions between Deleuze and Guattari’s work and the possibilities and politics of ‘queer’. Diarmuid Hester (2006), Michael O’Rourke (2005, 2006), Jeffrey Cohen and Todd Ramlow (2006) are breaking new theoretical ground and beginning to produce material that suggests there is value in thinking Judith Butler with Gilles Deleuze. In continuing this theoretical project, in this chapter we consider how Butler’s ideas of performativity and the lesbian phallus might resonate with Deleuzian schizoanalysis. Love your Lack In an essay exploring ‘the queer-in-motion of queer studies and of Deleuze’ (2006: para. 2), Jeffrey Cohen and Todd Ramlow (2006) inter- rogate Butlerian and Deleuzian notions of ‘becoming’ (2006: para. 13). Cohen and Ramlow argue that Butlerian ‘becomings’ be perceived as ‘a process formed of alliances with and through others, a process not col- lapsible to either side of a self/other binary, a process always in motion, changing (performatively) in multiple contexts’ (Cohen and Ramlow, 2006: para. 13). Such a reading of ‘becoming’ in Butler is juxtaposed to Deleuze and Guattari’s multiplicity which they argue is ‘the very condi- tion of minoritarian micro-politics and is propelled by multiple and simultaneous becomings’ (Cohen and Ramlow 2006: para. 13). Deleuze and Guattari’s concept of becoming (1987, 1996) takes matter, and cor- poreality, as a site of transformation and constant, internal differentia- tion. The self is always becoming different from itself. Within Deleuze and Guattari’s thought, the human body is an effect of its own move- ments and processes of connection. The body does not precede the flow of time through which it becomes. Deleuze and Guattari suggest that we do not begin as fixed subjects who then have to know a fixed world. Rather, they argue that there is experience and from this experience we form an image of ourselves as distinct subjects. All life is a series of ‘fold- ings’. Every cell, every organism (and the human body) are folds of the milieu of life. Our bodies are the becoming-actual of all our virtual pos- sibility, a limit set in chaos that is a resolution of infinite speeds. Subjectivity is an effect of our processes of becoming. While Cohen and Ramlow are disposed to consider resonances between Butler and Deleuze through notions such as becoming, others such as Rosi Braidotti (2006a & b) may be more sceptical about such readings. For instance, in her recent paper ‘Affirming the Affirmative’, Braidotti rejects Butler’s claims to connections with Spinoza, arguing that: The conatus as pure affirmative affectivity . . . has nothing to share with the logic of irreparable loss, unpayable debt and perpetual mourning, which is at the core of the psychoanalytic and deconstructive ethics that Butler espouses . . . In contrast to this tradition . . . I read Deleuze & Guattari as neo-vitalists who affirm the force of the affirmative and posit an ethics based on the transformation of negative into positive passions. (Braidotti 2006b: para. 18) Deleuzian thought might be perceived as coterminous with Braidotti’s movement towards ‘compulsory optimism’ (Rothe 2006), and the affir- mation of the affirmative. But this should not be the case, as an ethics based on transformation cannot be conceived outside relationships with lack, melancholy and mourning. The project of affirming the affirmative is apparent in Sasha Lambevski’s (2004) essay ‘Movement and Desire’, an essay focused on liberating queer theory from ‘the oedipal prison’. This escape takes the form of a study of ‘microsocial sexual rearrangements’. For Lambevski, these ‘rearrangements’ are important objects of study because they can help us see the limits of ideology and categorisation in accounting for flows of desire. These rearrangements demonstrate that: . . . sexuality belongs neither to the subject nor to the world exclusively. As such it is not ownable, quantifiable, recognisable, or amenable to critique. It is a flow attached to a nomadic desire . . . (Lambevski 2004) This theorisation of sexuality is echoed in Braidotti’s focus on the idea of ‘sustainability’; a means of countering theoretical moves to produce queer theoretical over-codings for new capitalist flows. In making her case for sustainability, Braidotti (2006b: para. 7) says that: I do not think that a naive celebration of global queerification on the one hand and the reference or the return to a universal on the other are inevitable or even necessary. On the contrary, I want to argue for a more specific and grounded sense of singular subjectivities that are collectively bound. It is our contention that Deleuzian and Butlerian inspired queer theory, jointly considered, can make productive contributions to consideration – and production – of a ‘grounded sense of singular subjectivities that are collectively bound’. Global queerification of capitalist flows does not have to be synonymous with queer theory. Quite the contrary, in fact, queer can be aligned with ‘a re-grounding of the subject in a materially embedded sense of responsibility’ (Braidotti 2006b: para. 7). As Braidotti’s article title suggests, ‘positive passions’ are key, alongside a feminism that ‘need not be critical but can be inventive and creative . . . experimenting with thinking is what we all need to learn’ (Braidotti 2006b: para. 31). This emphasis on affirmation is not necessarily antithetical to Butler’s ethics. In offering this reading we are mindful of Butler’s rethinking of her melancholic view of subject formation in The Psychic Life of Power (1997), departing from her emphasis on the force of Nietzchean punish- ment toward a Foucaultian ethics which ‘focuses on the peculiar creativ- ity in which morality engages and how it is, in particular that bad conscience becomes the means for manufacturing values’ (2005: 15, 16). Vikki Bell characterises this trajectory in Butler’s work ‘as tracing the paths by which different becomings are actualised’ (Bell 2006: 217). The creative task that underpins Butler’s ethics is found in thinking through the means by which values are manufactured. However, too much emphasis on creativity as affirmation is, to Butler’s mind, symptomatic of ahistoricity. She argues: The ‘ever new’ possibilities of resignification are derived from the postulated historical discontinuity of the term. But is this postulation itself suspect? Can resignifiability be derived from a pure historicity of ‘signs’? Or must there be a way to think about the constraints on and in resignification that takes account of its propensity to return to the ‘ever old’ in relations of social power? [. . .] Neither power nor discourse are rendered anew at every moment; they are not as weightless as the utopics of radical resignification might imply. (Butler 1993: 224) Butler and Braidotti disagree on the possibilities of ‘radical resignifica- tion’; in fact Butler is scathing about the possibilities attributed to strate- gies of ‘radical resignification’. Here we depart with Butler, concurring with Braidotti in perceiving the benefits of affirming the affirmative; but we do wonder about the tendency to ‘eliminate the negative’. If one is to understand singular subjectivities as collectively bound, surely it is important to consider the ties that bind. What are the prospects for a ‘materially embedded sense of responsibility’ when desire is not conceived as ‘ownable’ (Lambevski 2004) or ‘amenable to critique’ (Lambevski 2004). We want to occupy a realm in between Butler and Deleuze in which affirmation, resignification, lack and melancholy articulate different aspects of our theoretical work. In a recent discussion of the Butlerian idea of ‘performative knowledge’ (2006), Bell endeavours to trace what she perceives as some of the links between Butlerian and Deleuzian thought. Implicit within her discussion is a critique of certain readings of Butler’s oeuvre that situate it as at odds with Deleuzian theorising (for instance, see Braidotti 2006a & b; Colebrook 2000). Bell’s project is sympathetic to our attempt to empha- sise the theoretical utility of reading Butler alongside Deleuze. In her dis- cussion of ‘performative knowledge’ Bell focuses on how notions of co-extensivity come to play in the work of Deleuze and Butler. Below, Bell situates Butler’s understanding of ‘the subject’ as refusing a split between language and bodies: In place of the certainty that I am – the cogito – is an argument for ‘co- extensivity’. ‘Thinking’ is only confirmation that an individual exists within a discursive world; ‘the subject’, in this rendering, is co-extensive with his or her outside in the sense that they are produced by historically varying conditions that are in turn sustained by their produced elements. (Bell 2006: 214) For Bell, Butler is not a representational thinker, but rather a thinker whose focus is on particular lines of flight, lines ‘associated with knowl- edge, power and subjectification that encircle and produce the effect of interiorities’ (Bell 2006: 217). For Bell, these lines are part of Deleuze’s dispositif. To our mind, these lines of flight are also central to investigat- ing Deleuzian inspired questions. One such question, which might pro- ductively lend itself to a Butlerian focus on knowledge, power and subjectification, is Moira Gaten’s inquiry: ‘What is the relation between the collective assemblages which constitute the body politic and the sexual politics of language?’ (2000: 70). Such a spirit of inquiry inspires us to articulate selected schizoanalytic aspects of Butler’s work. We begin this section with a proviso. We are not suggesting that Deleuze and Guattari’s schizoanalysis and Butler’s lesbian phallus are ontologically compatible. Almost the opposite, in fact, as we have noted. The concepts of desire that are mobilised by Butler, Deleuze and Guattari are different. Butler takes up a psychoanalytic concept of desire alongside a Hegelian notion of the dialectic and Foucaultian reading of power. Deleuze and Guattari develop a post-Freudian, post-Marxist ontology of desire that conceives flows of desire in a manner comparable to Foucault’s heteroge- neous flows of capillary power. Desire, like power, is everything. It’s every- where: it is positive, productive and generative and is not only formed in relation to lack or sexuality. One of our key points is that it is this very incompatibility, this irreconcilable difference, which makes a union between Deleuze and Guattari and Butler so compelling and so useful – if they were already the same, why would we need both of them? Working the differences between Deleuze, Guattari and Butler offers one of the most dynamic scholarly trajectories available to contemporary queer theory. More than inquiring into the productive nature of the differences between Deleuze, Guattari and Butler, scholars need to adopt some self reflexivity in their approach to working with these theorists. In the spe- cialised fields within which we write, the ontological differences between Deleuze, Guattari and Butler are complex and profound. To a school teacher, an artist, a lawyer or well-educated professional outside our area of specialist study these differences are not so obvious. In fact, to the well-educated professional, the meta-politics of these scholars are not dissimilar. Within academic institutions Deleuze, Guattari and Butler are almost always employed to argue the importance of minoritarian bodies and to bring awareness to issues relating to minorities. Beyond a hagio- graphic focus on the theorists themselves and their philosophical struc- tures, their writings are used in ways that effect similar politics. This is the most pressing and immediate reason to acknowledge that a union of sorts already exists between them. It is an accidental union, a meta- textual, meta-ontological union, yet it shows up an ‘outside’ to theory, from which Deleuze and Guattari and Butler are more aligned than might be thought within their respective fields of scholarship. This point is sig- nificant if we are to work with theory in ways that impact outside the academy and, as tertiary educators who are often pushed to justify the relevance and significance of theory in our curriculum, we are pragmatic about the role of difference in the ontological frameworks of Deleuze, Guattari and Butler. Yes, they are antithetical and, furthermore, these dif- ferences need to be explicated and mined. However, outside their respec- tive ontologies, there is also a meta-political agenda at stake. In spite of Deleuze’s adamant disassociation from ‘left’ politics, his writings are increasingly taken up in ways that advance or argue for minoritarian sub- jects, as is the work of Judith Butler. As concepts, Deleuze and Guattari’s schizoanalysis and Butler’s lesbian phallus articulate the conviction that psychoanalytic models of power dominate the ways in which subjectivity is imagined and performed by individuals. Both concepts advance critiques of the role of psychoanaly- sis in contemporary cultural imaginaries, suggesting that this prominence is not a good thing and should be challenged. Part of this psychoanalytic model of subjective creation is the effect of psychic interiority, an assem- blage of connections which reproduces an unconscious closed off from contact with the real and closed in upon itself; psychoanalysis constructs the unconscious. In opposition to this psychoanalytic production of the unconscious, schizoanalysis involves the production, release and affir- mation of flows of desire. This desiring-production occurs in the indi- vidual body, yet it also occurs in large social assemblages and machines. Here, it is not what desire represents that is of importance, but rather the ways in which flows of desire are organised, in relation to capitalism, within the socius. Schizoanalysis and the lesbian phallus may both be critical of the role of psychoanalysis, but these critiques can also take very different forms. For Janell Watson, these divergent strategies for undoing capitalism and heterosexism provide important insights into the development of politi- cal subjectivities. Drawing on the work of Guattari, Watson (2005) the- orises the notion of ‘Polyphonic Subjectivity’, a notion somewhat akin to the fractal movement of subjectivity taken on by Deleuze and Guattari, who state: Let’s not rush in to introduce a term that would be like a phallus structur- ing the whole and personifying the parts, unifying and totalising everything. Everywhere there is libido as machine energy, and neither the horn nor the bumble bee have the privilege of being a phallus: the phallus intervenes only in the structural organisation and the personal relations deriving from it, where everyone, like the worker called to war, abandons his machines and sets to fighting for a war trophy that is nothing but a great absence, with one and the same penalty, one and the same ridiculous wound for all – cas- tration. This entire struggle for the phallus, this poorly understood will to power, this anthropomorphic representation of sex . . . is where desire finds itself trapped, specifically limited to human sex, unified and identified in the molar constellation. But the desiring-machines live on the contrary under the order of dispersion of the molecular elements. And one fails to under- stand the nature of partial objects if one does not see therein such elements, rather than parts of even a fragmented whole. (Deleuze and Guattari 1983: 323) Operating in a manner very similar to the productive critique inherent in schizoanalysis, the lesbian phallus draws upon the belief that meta- physical constructions – as well as material acts – produce sexual sub- jects. Indeed, Deleuze and Guattari and Butler make similar arguments about the cultural power and popularity of the Oedipal triangle: see for example, Butler’s work in The Psychic Life of Power, and Deleuze and Guattari’s position in Anti-Oedipus. Yet perhaps Deleuze and Guattari cast their theoretical net too wide? In focusing on an array of socio- economic forms of production (barbarians, savages and civilised men) that subvert the automatic production of Daddy-Mommy-Me and asso- ciated heterosexual practices, they almost gloss over or bypass critical applied understandings of the labour involved in constructing queer sub- jectivities that actively displace heterosexual assumptions, ideals and everyday practices. Butler first introduces the idea of the lesbian phallus in Bodies That Matter in a chapter entitled ‘The Lesbian Phallus and The Morphological Imaginary’. Here Butler sets out to rethink the idea of the phallus, via Sigmund Freud and Jacques Lacan. This investigation of the ‘imaginary construction of body parts’ leads her to argue: ‘To be a property of all organs is to be a property of no organ, a property defined by its very plas- ticity, transferability, and expropability’ (1993: 63). In short, Butler is attempting to create a theoretically useful fiction that allows readers to think differently about the circulation of power. Such a project is impor- tant, she argues, because ‘what is needed is not a new body part, as it were, but a displacement of the hegemonic symbolic of (heterosexist) sexual difference and the critical release of imaginary schemas for con- stituting sites of erotogenic pleasure’ (1993: 91). For Butler, this strategy of displacement allows us to ‘consider that “having” the phallus can by symbolised by an arm, a tongue, a hand (or two), a knee, a thigh, a pelvic bone, an array of instrumentalised body-like things’ (Butler 1993: 88). Butler’s lesbian phallus is very much open to variation and plasticity. We are reminded of Deleuze and Guattari’s (1987) ‘Body without Organs’, an elaboration of Artaud’s (1976: 571) suggestion that: ‘When you will have made him a body without organs, then you will have delivered him from all his automatic reactions and restored him to his true freedom.’3 Butler is concerned with matter and representation, not with the hope of excavating a ‘real’, but rather with highlighting the ways in which imaginaries are constructed, and destabilising anatomy as a referent for sexual desire. Similarly, Deleuze and Guattari’s ‘partial objects’ are one part of all desiring machines. These partial objects define the working machine or the working parts, but in a state of dispersion such that one part is continually referring to a part from an entirely different machine, like the red clover and the bumble bee, the wasp and the orchid, the bicycle horn and the dead rat’s ass. (Deleuze and Guattari 1983: 323) This theorisation of partial objects helps us to imagine the unending pos- sibilities inherent in desiring machines. It refutes totalising and unifying sexual structures. In concluding her discussion of this concept Butler notes that ‘to speak of the lesbian phallus as a possible site of desire is not to refer to an imaginary identification and/or desire that can be mea- sured against a real one; on the contrary it is simply to promote an alter- native imaginary to a hegemonic imaginary and to show, through that assertion, the ways in which the hegemonic imaginary constitutes itself’ (1993: 91). Butler, Deleuze and Guattari show up the constructed nature of ‘the whole’ and our libidinal investments in particular ideas of the whole. The lesbian phallus is part of Butler’s greater project within Bodies That Matter, a project focused primarily on understanding relations of power, and how these relations are complicit in ‘the production of sexed morphologies through regulatory schemas . . . to show how power rela- tions work in the very formation of “sex” and its “materiality” ’ (1993: 16–17). In a fairly Deleuzian register, this project is characterised by Butler as ‘less a theory of cultural construction than a consideration of the scenography and topography of construction. This scenography is orchestrated by and as a matrix of power; a matrix that remains disarti- culated if we presume constructedness and materiality as necessarily oppositional notions’ (1993: 28). While Butler has positioned her scholarship as neo-Spinozist, rather than Deleuzian, we glean elements of Deleuzian schizoanalysis in ideas such as the lesbian phallus, or Butler’s take on ‘cross-dressing’ as a kind of performance or masking that ‘characterises the mutual lure of the orchid and the wasp’ (Flieger 2000: 59). By providing the tools for better understanding the techniques through which the body is framed and formed, Butler allows for certain questions to emerge, questions that res- onate throughout her work. These questions interrogate constructions that are understood as artificial, but nonetheless crucial. Two questions prompted by such a line of inquiry are recited below: How do tacit normative criteria form the matter of bodies? And can we understand such criteria not simply as epistemological impositions on bodies, but as the specific social regulatory ideals by which bodies are trained, shaped and formed? (1993: 54) For us, doing research on disability and sexualities within the broad field of education, such lines of questioning continue to provide fruitful lines of inquiry (see Rasmussen 2006; Hickey-Moody, Harwood and Rasmussen 2007). Such lines of questioning open up possibilities for Deleuzian thinking about unimaginable and as yet unthinkable queer partial objects: For what can one do . . . With respect to that which can only be seen and heard, which is never confirmed by another organ and is the object of Forgetting in memory, of an Unimaginable in imagination, and of an Unthinkable in thought – what else can one do, other than speak of it? Language is itself the ultimate double which expresses all doubles – the highest of simulacra. (Deleuze 1990: 284) In closing, we would like to note that, in a manner akin to Deleuze and Guattari, Butler seriously engages with theorists who are critical of the legacy of humanism. In responding to a question about the significance of Haraway and Latour’s work on hybridity and the nonhuman Butler states: I prefer to work the legacy of humanism against itself, and I think that such a legacy is not necessarily in tension with those who seek to displace human- ism through recourse to vocabularies that disperse agency across the eco- logical field. They are two ways of undoing the same problem, and it seems important to have scholars and activists who work at both ends of the problem. (Butler in Meijer and Prins 1998: 285, 286) Gilles Deleuze and Judith Butler are theorists who stand alone in their own rights. Respectively, they have large scholarly followings. While Butler suggests that she opposes Deleuze because she finds ‘no registration of the negative in his work, and . . . feared that he was proposing a manic defence against negativity’ (2004: 198), in the same paper Butler notes that she regularly receives essays and comments from people who insist that she is Deleuzian (2004: 198). In keeping with such contradictory messages, we are not arguing that Deleuze and Butler’s positions should be seen as a neat fit. However, we do argue for a theoretical utility in thinking Butler and Deleuze side by side in imagining the future of queer theorising. Hocquenghem can be everywhere on the spiral and say all at once: homo- sexual desire is specific, there are homosexual utterances, but homosexual- ity is nothing, it’s just a word, and yet let’s take it literally, let’s pass through it, to make it yield all the otherness it contains – and this otherness is not the unconscious of psychoanalysis, but the progression of a future sexual becoming. (Deleuze 2004: 288) In the preface to Hocquenghem’s book L’Après-Mai des faunes, Deleuze explicitly warns against the psychoanalytical declaration that in the end ‘we are all unconscious latent queer’ (284). For Deleuze, Hocquenghem’s book is concerned with homosexuality, but, at the same time and in opposition to the psychoanalytical bio-universality of sexual identity, it is a book that clearly claims ‘no one is really homosexual’. In this short preface, Deleuze emphasises that for Hocquenghem desire has nothing to do with the wholeness of Oedipal sexuality, the universal narrative of the family triangle. Indeed desire here represents nothing. It has no primary subject or object. Desire can only assemble, without constituting wholes: machinic breaks, partialities, discontinu- ities make desire. Deleuze thus suggests that queer desire only remains specific to a peculiar relationship with the Outside whose characteristics are present in staying not primarily with the same sex (that is, we are all queer and want to be recognised by the social order as such) so as to resist heteronormativity, but in embracing the non-reproductive order of sex (that is, the bio-social order of reproduction) by inventing, rather than constituting, sexuality. Such an invitation to invent sexuality appealing to a future of sexual becoming, however, is not quickly to be confused with the projection for a new future for queer politics, since this kind of future is already incorporated by the capitalisation of desire through the imperative ‘you can now be whatever you want to be’. Rather, a future of sexual becoming here entails the more implicit task of the production of novel utterances and modalities that do not and must not revolve around being queer itself. The becoming of sexuality thus demands neither the belief in a liberating future nor the impossi- bility of reaching a more inclusive social order, since these can only operate through the Oedipal law of the symbolic. The future of sexual becoming instead entails the activities of microsexual variations that are already here acting on a present spanning towards an immediate past- future, determined not by the psychobiology of sexual identity, but by the agitating activities of virtual sexes ready to invent a future in the everyday. As Deleuze explains, in Hocquenghem’s book utterances of sexuality define two political modalities. In the first place a modality about sexu- ality in general. The homosexual has nothing to do with phallocentrism since its sexual modality above all denounces the phallocentric repression of femininity. The point here, as Deleuze highlights, is not to reinsert any pseudo-signifier or symbolic relation that could erect homosexuality (and queer sexuality) to the status of transcendence through which all sexes can be explained. Indeed, the political identification with the very word homosexual, with the very margin-position is here denounced as a mere function of nominalism. ‘[. . .] language is not information or communi- cation, but prescription, order and command. You will be on the margin. It’s the centre that makes the margin’ (286). Assigning a social status to intolerable sexuality makes it tolerable. What deviates from the law becomes constitutive of the law. And yet, Deleuze points at how a word by just being a word produces specific utterances, ‘acting as if . . . out of defiance [. . .]. We will act as queens because we want it [. . .] We will take you at your word’ (286). In this way, Deleuze points out, homosex- uality will not close itself within an already constituted self, but will remain open to all possible implications, a micrological, microphysical reversible sex, a transmutation of sexes from one order to another, from flowers to motorcycles, ‘an intensive continuum of substances’ (287). In short, this book for Deleuze is an invitation to extract sexes from the stratification of desire into the whole of Sex, able to state – as an order- word – that ‘in the end everyone’s a little gay’. Rather, Deleuze suggests that the new homosexual can at last say: ‘nobody is homosexual. [. . .] There is no more homosexual subject, but homosexual productions of desire, and homosexual assemblages that produce utterances, proliferat- ing everywhere . . .’ (288). In this short preface, Deleuze denounces all attempts at identifying specific yet collective modes of desire with one sexuality and rather points at how desiring assemblages become producers of a singular mul- tiplicity of sexes never integrated into a whole. However, it may be important to specify here that Deleuze’s and Deleuze and Guattari’s phi- losophy of immanence does not aim at liberating desire from an all- constraining form of sexuality. This will imply confusing the field of desire – of production and destruction, composition and decomposition of assemblages – with an ultimate moral subject of desire. What the phi- losophy of immanent desire has to offer to the ontology of queer sexu- ality entails no ontological whole – all being is located in bio-psychical essence or discursive constructions or in their intra-action – for sexual identity. A philosophy of immanent desire rather demands an engage- ment with a material, at once abstract and concrete, metaphysics of a multiplicity of sexes implicating the transformation of mental, affective, social, political, aesthetic modalities. Such metaphysics has no bottom ground to refer back to, no genealogical tree to evolve from, no bio- ontology of sex to achieve. Instead, it can only be implicated in processes of continual variations of sexes – a series of veritable adventures of sex – whose conditions are not set primarily by a causal grid, a structure able to filter what lies outside of itself, but rather by virtual activities, larval bodies, agitating particles involving the becoming of an always collec- tive desire: a swerve in the continual sequence of events, or a clinamen, as Lucretius called it, which breaks off from the linear trajectory of the arrow of time. For Deleuze, such a swerve points to an original deter- mination in the direction of the movement of the atom, which remains however unassignable or inaccessible in its actual taking place. This is an intensive field of remarkable points – a multiplicity – of any causal series, a ‘lex atomi’ that acts as guarantee of an irreducible plurality of causes and exclusion of any totalised understanding of causality pro- ducing some universal destiny.1 Lucretius stresses the random nature of the swerve in blocs of spacetime, precisely to expose the possibility of declining: a heterogeneous individuation in the process of being indi- viduated, a becoming of the continual series of singular assemblages of desire. With this premise, this article will endeavour to ask if it is possible for queer sexuality to be thought as an immanent philosophy of desire. In particular, the article will discuss the centrality of the ontology of per- formativity – be it discursive or material-discursive – in queer theory and consider whether this offers a challenge to psycho-bio-logic queerness as the ultimate constitutor of all modalities of sex. Can the ontology of per- formativity provide a politics of future sexual becoming that defies the bifurcation of culture from nature, gender from sex? Queer theory has strictly drawn on post-structuralist feminism to challenge precisely the biological ground of sex at the core of psycho- analysis, and the ontology of nature. Queer theory has taken the post- structuralist opportunity of undoing the biological fixity of sex so as to expose the artificiality of a sexuality, which is always already mediated by language, discourses and the order of the symbolic. While some fem- inist theories have turned the biologism of psychoanalysis into a pro- ductive materiality for a sexual difference that cannot be contained in the order of representation, and thus reversing sexual bio-pathologies into the metaphysical affirmation of a dark feminine sex, as in the unique concept of the matter-mater-matrix by Luce Irigaray,2 the post- structuralism that has come to dominate gender politics in queer theory has fully rejected such biologism, elevating the question of material sex- uality into a structural model of psychic mental relations forming the symbolic order of gender. In such a structure of signs, signifiers and objects can be arbitrarily linked without any need to be rooted in sub- stance. There is no biologism that can explain in a cause-effects chain the relation between sex and gender. Indeed sex, any natural ultimate cause of sexual identity, does not exist outside, but within the text, the realm of culture, mediated by language and discursive formations. By disen- tangling queer sexuality from the law of nature, always mediated by the cultural realm of the symbolic, queer theorists have suggested, contra the psychoanalysis dictum ‘everyone’s a little gay’, that there is no natural order to sex. Rather sex cannot but remain temporary and ambiguous in the fractured structure of signifiers, which produce sex through and in performativity. Most queer theory has been influenced by such a concept of performativity, introduced by Judith Butler and derived from the work of Derrida (1990; 1993). It is this concept (an onto-methodological concept) that may need to be revisited were we to open queer theory to a metaphysics of imma- nent desire, implicating an abductive field of machinic experience involv- ing the direct alliance of affects, concepts and percepts, what Deleuze and Guattari define as a machinic desire made of eventuations and becomings. In Gender Trouble, Butler brings together Derrida’s concept of per- formativity and Foucault’s claim about the productive effects of regula- tory power so as to put forward a notion of identity qua performativity. Butler proposes that we understand gender not as a thing or as a set of free-floating attributes, not as an essence, but rather as a ‘doing’, ‘gender is itself a kind of becoming or activity [. . .] gender ought not to be con- ceived as a noun or a substantial thing or a static cultural maker, but rather as an incessant and repeated action of some sort’ (1990: 112). In Bodies That Matter, Butler argues for a linkage between femininity, queer and materiality to explore the conditions, power encroaching the body. Such materiality is above all understood in its classical sense of gen- eration or origination, or causality (31). In her view, such material cause is not separable from its historical formations and the shifting of mean- ings. A body is never just given but is rather produced. This is an itera- tive production specifically understood in terms of the performativity, a ‘specific modality of power as discourse’ (187). Hence, performativity is neither wilful nor just arbitrary. A specific his- toricity of discourses determines their power to enact what discourses name (187). This is how the material is normalised: through reiteration, repetition of speech and signs. And yet it is precisely such reiteration of signs, or arbitrary signifiers arranged in a grid of power that determines social positions through restrictive representations and ideological social encodings, which allows Butler to open up and subvert the grid. By undoing the signs by the same means of reiteration, performativity ‘opens the signifiers to new meanings and new possibilities for political resignification’. It is clear that Butler’s work both emphasises how the norm materialises (or animates) the body, through resignification, speech acts that bring into being what they name. Performativity therefore defines the production of discourses as they occur through a certain kind of repetition, which installs (sets into practice) the effects of certain ontologies. Performativity shows the conditions under which certain biological differences become norms of sex in certain historical periods. At the same time, it uproots sexual identity from the bio-cultural imperative of natural sex through the transgressive and subversive repetition of signifiers. In this sense, it has been argued that performativity is inherently queer (Sedgwick 1993) since it does not offer an identity, but a modality of sexual transformation entangled to the productive transformation of discourses. However, one may ask to what extent such transformation is not already prescribed by the discourses, the structures and the ideologies that produce it. In short, whether the volatility of queer sexuality, its subversive practices of reiter- ation, are not mere reiterations of predetermined positions encroached in the semiotic structure of the symbolic, ultimately unable to account for the material activities of signs-bodies, autonomous from the constituted whole of the text forever writing the script for sexual identities within the technocapitalist imperative of performativity. Most recently a focus on the implications of technoscience for gender and queer theories has clearly shifted the central concept of performativity towards new critical territories. The emphasis on the performative nature of signs qua signifiers, it has been argued, has indeed left the legacy in queer theory of a passive body-sex, a mere container of socio-cultural significations. Recently, Karen Barad (2005) has argued for a post-humanist concep- tion of performativity for queer studies.3 While Butler’s theory of per- formativity privileges signifying structures of power as the ultimate shapers of identity, a doing without the doer, Barad proposes to engage with the material activities of performativity mediated not by signifiers but always relative to an observer. She argues for a notion of agency that exposes the repetitive intra-actions between the material and the discur- sive, tackling the ancient ontological question about the conditions that enable an object to be defined as real.4 In particular, borrowing from the theory of quantum mechanics as developed by Neils Bohr, Barad sets the scene for a performative meta- physics able to challenge the separateness between the observer and the observed. She draws from Bohr’s distinction between the interaction of independent entities (or relata) and intra-action of relata-within- phenomena. For Bohr, relata are not prior to intra-active components. Rather, specific intra-actions make relata dependent on phenomena (200). In what she calls ‘my agential realist elaboration of Bohr’s episte- mological inseparability between observer and observed’, Barad derives that ‘phenomena are the ontological inseparability of agentially intra- acting “components”’ (200). This is to specify that intra-active phe- nomena are ontological prior to given or pre-existing relata. It is only through the performative repetition of intra-action that an agential cut able to configure a separation between objects and subjects can occur. There is nothing that pre-exists such intra-actions or relations that exclude all transcendent supplement – an exterior point of measurement. Here causality is re-worked in terms of agential realist ontology, a ‘realist understanding of the nature of apparatuses . . . play[ing] . . . a crucial role in the production of phenomena’ (201). In particular, Bohr’s notion of apparatuses as dynamic reconfigurations of the world is here borrowed to suggest that these are nothing but them- selves phenomena (202). Similarly, phenomena are ‘produced through agential intra-action of multiple apparatuses of bodily production’ (202). As specific causal material enactments, these agential intra-actions, which include as opposed to Butler’s performativity, a relation between humans and nonhumans, culture and nature, are phenomena that constitute reality. For Barad, Bohr’s explanation of the way phenomena are insepa- rable from objects (the intra-action between specific physical arrange- ments) warns against the relativism of a theory of performativity that exclusively locates action, change, dynamics in the discursive arrange- ment of signs, leaving behind the complex agential realist activities, which defy any splitting of the material from the discursive. From this standpoint, she argues that ‘meaning is not ideational but rather specific material (re)configuration of the world, and semantic indeterminacy, like ontological indeterminacy, is only locally resolvable through specific intra-actions’ (203). By re-working Butler’s performing bodies to include non-human agencies as constitutive of the reality of matter, Barad proposes a concept of performativity beyond its anthropo- morphic limitations. Thus reality is not delimited to the linguistic or dis- cursive acts or to the human-centred vision of the body. ‘Performativity is not understood as iterative citationality (Butler) but rather iterative intra-activity’ (212). By giving back historicity to matter, rather than imposing human history on matter, Barad claims that ‘reality is not composed of things-in-themselves or things behind phenomena, but “things-in- phenomena”’(202). This implies that specific intra-actions produce, perform and enact a changeable being: a materiality of continual change is derived from actual intra-actions between the constitutive components of matter. The discursive therefore is always already part of the material intra-production of phenomena that is particular physical arrangements that give meaning to certain concepts rather than others (204). These apparatuses, resonating but not matching with the Foucaultian discur- sive practices, are material reconfigurations that produce material phe- nomena, a dynamic relationality that is locally determined in a particular phenomenon, through specific causal intra-actions (205). In short, Barad re-works, in the light of early quantum physics, the material-discursive practice of gender performance as entailing specific iterative enactments, agential intra-actions, through which matter is differentially articulated (207). By assigning no priority to given entities or discursivity, Barad points at how intra-actions are constraining activities that do not determine the future, but rather remain uncertain, depending on the intra-activities of phenomena, which entail human, non-human, cyborgian forms of agency: a pluralist enactment or doing. In other words, Barad’s posthu- man metaphysics of performativity works to defy the belief in an ultimately external observational point. Performativity entails enacting intra-actions that are not in the world, but are of the world (213). From this standpoint, Barad suggests that queer theory needs to embrace a relational ontology that rejects the metaphysics of things and the rela- tivism of effects and that is yet able to account for the ‘role we play in the intertwined practices of knowing and becoming’. Her detailed engage- ment with quantum mechanics importantly points to a novel approach to materiality and nature in an attempt to problematise both objective realism and subjective constructivism. This enables Barad to propose a new notion of queerness not simply derived from nature but produced by the intra-action of phenomena in things. Quantum mechanics is here not simply conceived as a discursive representation of the behaviour of atoms used to explain human culture, but as itself implicated in an apparatus of knowledge produced out of the agential realism of phenomena. This has important consequences for the formulation of the relation between sci- ences and culture vis-à-vis a materiality of culture. No longer a material- ity filtered by the semiotic chains of signification, but a materiality of agency, an agential realism that accounts for all kinds of phenomena as always already occurring in things. Hence, this implicit conception of quantum queerness seems to suggest that the intra-actions of phenomena, far from being divorced from the real at the limit point of human per- ception, are instead already part of the real up to constitute a veritable agencial realism encompassing both human and non-human and thus excluding all possibilities of defining queerness from one external point of view, for example a hetero-normative point of view of sex. Barad’s ‘relational ontology’, defining the ontology of being queer as an intra-active performativity of phenomena-in-things, replaces Butler’s semiotic-discursive performativity and thus introduces a new mode of conceiving queerness, now enlarged to non-human agents. It may be useful at this point however to explore further the implications of such ontology in the light of Deleuze’s and Deleuze and Guattari’s abstract or incorporeal materialism. While Barad’s relational ontology is implicated in a phenomenal account of real intra-actions which themselves produce phenomena, the abstract materialism of Deleuze and Guattari points not at the phenom- ena as constitutor of reality, but at the distinctive yet coexisting planes of virtual and actual materialities as felt in experience, otherwise termed abstract machines. Deleuze and Guattari’s abstract machine includes not agential realist intra-activities, but the occurrence of singular events, not a performative iteration and enactment of phenomena, but throbs of experiences in duration, not the posthumanist shift towards the reality of signs, but a pragmatics of abduction fusing together conception, perception and action, an onto-method of dramatisation of virtual sexes, the a-humanist experience of abstraction. Similarly, abstract materialism may question the extent to which Barad’s elevation of quantum mechanics from epis- temology to metaphysics does not risk reiterating the discursive approach to science, which she refuses, insofar as by rejecting what is given in materiality, that is abstract bodies, she also rejects what is implied in quantum mechanics: the event of experiencing quantum, imperceptible, larval bodies before these acquire the qualitative proper- ties of phenomena. Before discussing these distinct material metaphysics further, it may be useful to discuss Deleuze and Guattari’s notion of the abstract machine first. An abstract machine in itself is not physical or corporeal any more than it is semiotic; it is diagrammatic (it knows nothing of the distinction between the artificial and natural either). It operates by matter, not by substance; by function, not by form. The abstract machine is pure Matter-Function – a diagram independent of the forms and substances, expressions and contents it will distribute. (1987:141) In as much as there is nothing eternal or ideal about machines, nothing universal that can be deducted to explain the concrete, similarly there is no concrete induction, nothing bio-physical, from which to derive an abstraction. On the contrary, Deleuze and Guattari suggest that abstrac- tion only entails the primacy of complete assemblages, the gelling together of pre-individualities, a felt continuum that embeds discrete bodies within a field growing by its edges, adding and subtracting com- ponents: an ontogenetic process in which all elements play a part and yet no element can form a whole. The abstract machine entails an engineer- ing patchwork of partialities passing from one state to another, fusing and breaking into each other, and yet belonging-together at points of transitions, which are less irreducible dots than inflections, critical thresholds, curvatures of imperceptible continuities. In other words, an abstract machine entails a mathematical topology of matter, whereby beneath the continuity and discontinuity of forms and substances, expressions and contents, entire populations of passional signs grow by connections. This is not simply to be conceived as a bottom-up generation of mate- rial forms triggered by the intra-actions between phenomena. Rather, the composition of an abstract machine entails the togetherness of heteroge- neous regions of spacetime that are virtually real and yet not realised. Far from implicating an agential realism, all be it a composite agency made of phenomena-in-things, an abstract machine rather distinguishes between degrees of intensive and extensive materiality. It is not possible to account for becoming in an all-encompassing identity, analogy or verisimilitude between phenomena and things. What is at stake for an abstract machine is exactly an account of the amodal connection, the gap, interval, hiatus, between the autonomy of the abstract and the concrete. What the machine does, or rather what machinic connection deploys, is the process by which becoming or novelty can be possible again, without being explained away by the perennial primacy of phenomena, the seamless intra-activity between phenomena and things. One may indeed wonder: what exactly are the conditions for such intra-activity between phenomena-in-things so that it happens again and again? Deleuze and Guattari’s machinic materialism is instead directly con- cerned with what is given, that is, what is there in potential to be expe- rienced: how does an abstract relationality become unfolded again to become concrete? The point here is less that matter is made of parts that intra-act to constitute reality, invoking a quasi-empirical inductive method, but rather what counts here is to affirm that between parts there is a multifolded dimension of lived abstractness: the insides of and spaces between atoms, the atomic and subatomic particles are separated by voids larger than they themselves are, where each particle’s own inside is itself a virtual folding. The space in which atoms relate to each other is infinitely divisible yet continuous, a fuzzy quantity, an inexact cipher, an incomputable materiality, which is nonetheless held-together by virtual populations at the interval from one transition to another, entering sin- gular composition, folding inside out according to certain pressures, gra- dients, inflections. This machinic relation is primarily diagrammatic insofar as numbers of connection are primarily numbering affections passing from one state to another, deploying a phase space that corre- sponds not to a spatialised extension (for example, phenomena-in- things), but to an intensive spatium, an abstract quantity or quantum. Here a sense of adimensional blocs of spacetime comes into play, a mul- tiplicity of Aions. It is evident that the abstract machine determines not an ontology con- stituted by the intra-action of parts that are here and now, the activities of actuals on actuals. If abstract machines entail immediacy, this is cer- tainly not induced by the instantaneous direct perception between present phenomena-in-things. Rather, such immediacy can only address the immediate momentum running just before and after the present. This momentum can also usefully be defined by William James in terms of a ‘specious present’,5 a dilated discreteness of infinitesimal durations: the merging of a bloc of spacetime just gone and a bloc of spacetime just arriving in the relaxed bloc of spacetime of the present. In this sense, what lies in the intra of intra-actions is a gap or interval that does not match with the agential realism of discrete phenomena. Such an interval is instead an abstract continuum, a virtuality composed of remarkable infinitesimal points, exposing the imperceptible activities of crowds no matter at what scale. And yet one may wonder, if an abstract machine defines without determining what is given in potential (that is, virtual materiality) and what can become actual (concrete materiality), then how can it be that the abstract machine at once accounts for the discrete and the continuum without imposing another external point of view on the activities of matter? How can the abstract machine engage with con- crete experience without resorting to an absolute metaphysics that unites discreteness, as it were, from above? Deleuze and Guattari’s philosophy of immanence leaves no doubt that this may be the case. In particular, the concept of the event clearly points out that a virtual world is implicated in every subject as a field from which a point of view, for example a manner or modality, distinguishes itself. Against Aristotelian essentialism, these mannerisms are modalities of transformation of worlds extended to the cosmos, but not for such cosmos to encompass all modalities summed into One totality (Deleuze 1993: 60–1). Indeed, such cosmos is never a whole but a machinic mul- tiplicity of worlds continuously composing and breaking down. And yet these mannerisms cannot be disentangled from the virtual constellations of worlds that make an event possible. But how exactly does an event come about? Deleuze provides a precise notion of the event by drawing at once from the monadic metaphysics of Leibniz and the processual thought of Alfred North Whitehead. With Whitehead, Deleuze defines an event as always encompassed by larger and smaller events ad infinitum; an infinitesimal division here is used to account for the infinitesimal continuum of mate- rial worlds. The world of events is therefore continuous and yet, for Whitehead, only discontinuity can account for the becoming of being (or conscrescence) and make possible the distinction between the coming into being of an event and the event itself. Against what Whitehead saw as the pervasive belief in the seamless continuity of time, the constant flows of eternal becoming, he proposed, by appropriating quantum mechanics, an atomic theory of time, defining the event as the onset and perishing of an actual occasion. Hence the event specifically accounts for the dawn and sunset of experience when it commences and reaches a completion. It terminates by passing from one state, actual occasion or present, into another, past.6 Thus every actual event is implicated in the event just gone, which however can only go once completed, once from the arrow of time a new path is taken, at a point inflection, the infinitesimal curvatures of the clinamen. The past- present defines the onset of the event and the present-future the trans- formation; the occurrence of an actual experience entails a semi-open cycle of birth and perishing. What becomes here is not the actual experi- ence but the continuity between one occurrence and another. The famous Whiteheadian formulation – the many become one and are increased by one7 – implies that a chaotic multiplicity of past events, eternal objects of a disjunctive diversity, become one, not a pregiven one, but enter into an actual occasion as an inventive process of occurrence. Here pre- individual bodies tend to become present anew, rubbing against each other so as to actualise anew; a field of compossible worlds becomes incompossible once the constellations of virtual universes enter into one extension or the other. Extension indeed, as Deleuze points out, is the first component or con- dition of both Whitehead’s and Leibniz’s definition of the event (1993: 77). Here extension entails the connection of wholes and parts. ‘[I]t is when one element is stretched over the following ones, such that it is a whole and the following elements are its parts’ (77). A second definition for events is their intrinsic, intensive properties, such as a certain texture, colour, timbre of a sound. A third definition is the individual, which for Whitehead entails creativity, the production of novelty, the becoming or concrescence of elements into a novel assemblage, ‘the production of novel togetherness’. ‘ “Creativity” is the principle of novelty. An actual occasion is a novel entity diverse from any entity in the “many” which it defines’ (Whitehead 1978: 21). Such novelty entails not simply a link between parts, an intra-action between agencies, but the activity of prehensions. The notion of prehension is at the core of Whiteahead’s metaphysical enterprise for invention of a new empiricism; an empiricism detracted from the priority of sensory discrete perception.8 Prehension is not sense perception. It determines neither a cognitive act of observation nor a sensory-motor response. Prehension may be better described as enactment, a propensity to feel thought before sensing, or an abstract sensation that is non-sensuous, an affection that coincides not with here and now but with a vector connecting here with there, immediately before and after. Prehensions define the individual unity of the event. ‘Everything prehends its antecedents and its concomitants, and by degrees, prehends a world’ (Deleuze 1993: 78). The ear is a prehension of sound. The eye a prehen- sion of light. The vector of prehensions moves from the world to the subject, from the prehended datum to the prehending one (a ‘superject’); thus the data of a prehension are public elements, while the subject is the intimate or private elements that expresses immediacy, individuality and novelty. (78) However, prehensions are never just prehensions of something. Each pre- hension is a prehension of prehension (the feeling of or before feeling) and the event is only but a nexus of prehensions. Each new prehension forms an individual unity and thus becomes the datum for the next pre- hension. The objectification of one prehension and the subjectification of another are what compose an event. Thus an event is at once potential and possible, virtual and actual, abstract and concrete. Each event is at once implicated in the becoming of another event and in its own becoming (78). Like Leibniz’s monads, prehensions are active expressions of the datum prehended: ‘the form in which the datum is folded in the subject, a feeling, or manner . . .’ (78). According to Deleuze, Whitehead re- echoes the problematic already dear to Leibniz concerning the investiga- tion of the conditions that allow the objective world to become subjective: the convergence of divergent series as producer of novelty. Such conditions however do not occur without the ingression of pure potentialities in the event. In this sense, the notion of events not only challenges the object-subject ‘bifurcation of nature’, but also provides a metaphysics of concrete experience, which is not derived from the intra- action between things-phenomena as mediated by inferential signs, but expresses quantic signs in terms of felt, prehended continuities between states of matter, the becoming of occurrences of abstraction. The abstract machine thus entails extensive connections, intrinsic qualities, prehended unities, experienced virtualities, a felt abstraction implicated in the smallest and largest events, a discontinuous repetition of continuity, a becoming of assemblages. As previously seen, Barad’s posthuman performative ontology instead is predicated upon the iterative patterns of physical phenomena located in phenomena themselves and constituting patterns of local intelligibility by means of the ‘prosthetic performativity of the agencies of observation’. These involve further patterns of intra-action, whose conceptual-discursive character is determined by a perceptual identifi- cation operating not via sense perception but by means of an inferen- tial web. As Joseph Rouse in his article ‘Barad’s Feminist Naturalism’ explains: ‘Discursive practices as characterized by a pragmatically infer- entialist semantics (see Brandom 1994) are thus an indispensable com- ponent of any intelligible phenomenon, and a crucial part of Barad’s “agencies of observation” ’.9 Rouse clarifies that for Barad’s agential realism, meaning and its interpretation are thoroughly material phe- nomena starting with a mark on bodies ‘whether these are movements, vocalizations, or inscriptions’. These marks on bodies are ‘the material indications of phenomena’. An inferential and not perceptual intra- action with marks on bodies (establishing a reference frame, marking off and counting equal unit division, standardising the units, and so forth) is at stake in the iterative practice of material-discursive per- formance. The configuration of intra-active phenomena implies the iterative function of inferential semantics: a shift from linguistic per- formativity still involving a given subject, to a semantic performativity now involving the priority of semantic interpretations towards a mate- rial system. But how, one may wonder, does such semantic performativity come about? What are the conditions of such quasi-memetic transference of meaningful signs or marks on bodies in different contexts, so quickly dis- posing of the materiality of prehensions? Despite invoking posthuman materialism, what seems to remain excluded from such iteration of signs is precisely a materialism of conti- nuity: prehensive activities serving neither to direct attention to the phys- icality of the senses nor to the mind so that it can add its representation to the formation of the world. As Whitehead argues, the relation between perception and knowledge involves the prehensive activities of thought, an abstract or non-sensuous grasping or affective tonality relating the object and the subject, the knower and the known through a primary process of prehensive events (1933: 176–8). Deleuze, together with Whitehead and Leibniz, addresses the materi- ality of continuity in terms of psycho-mental prehensions marking the conditions for the expression of the constitutive relations of the world in its creative process, its adventures of becoming (the concrescence of many worlds into one with the addition of one). And this is not simply because the datum is always a construct, a sort of phenomena in the object, but more fundamentally because the continual process relocates, rather than simply inferentially situate in a locus, every datum in a world of pure activity or pure experience. Hence prehensions are themselves power-beings, synthesisers of asymmetric forces into the production of a higher yet infinitesimal unity, which defines the adventurous construction of novelty. Hence what does not cease to repeat in the passages of events is the prehensive immanence of thought. Brian Massumi calls this sensation: the point of conversion where perception unfolds into thought and thought infolds into perception. Sensation is ‘the registering of the mul- tiplicity of potential connections in the singularity of a connection actu- ally under way’ (2002: 64). The thought-perception continuum operates recursively. It is a refrain where every moment extends beyond itself in a way that is thought and felt, anticipated form of a yearning or tending (65). Iteration here has nothing to do with a repetition derived from the intra-active enactment of phenomena. Rather ‘[t]he different components conserve their heterogeneity, but are nevertheless captured by a refrain’ (Guattari 1995: 17) which couples them together. The refrain is the mul- tirhythmic interval produced not by the intra-action of the components, but by the relationship’s infinitesimal relation to itself first. For Deleuze and Guattari, the interval between events is part of the production of novel events qua experiences. This entails neither the performativity of discursive apparatuses on bodies nor the intra-active performativity of material-discursive phenomena. Iteration rather points at the persistent variation of pure experience. In The Critical and The Clinical (Deleuze and Parnet 1997: 86–7), Deleuze draws on the radical empiricism of William James to remind us that experience is better to be understood in terms of texture: the fabric of experience entails the construction of a patchwork, sewing and stitch- ing elements or throbs, quantum throbs, of experience from next to next, by means of the intermediary series. As James puts it: ‘Experience itself, taken at large, can grow by its edges. That one moment of it pro- liferates into the next by transitions which, whether conjunctive or dis- junctive, continue the experiential tissue, cannot, I contend, be denied’ (1912: 42). Throbs of experience rather than agential realist entities entail the continual experiencing of virtuality, a lived abstractness, a real bundle of relations: space as a relation of linkage, time as a continuous relation of enveloping. Here is how experience must always start: with a multiplicity of felt and not inferential thought, interlaced and super- imposed upon each other in all directions, revealing themselves as one follows them. It is here perhaps that queer theory can benefit from Deleuze and Guattari’s philosophy of immanent desire act to expose not simply what is queer, what are the phenomena that constitute queerness, but how, who, when queer: the conditions of pure experience enveloped in an intensive spatium preceding and exceeding the constitutive quality of sexuality derived from the limits of the intelligible, of phenomena-in- things. In other words, the contribution that the philosophy of imma- nence can offer to the production of a philosophy of queerness lies in the capacity to affirm the events of intensive determinations of experience as conditions of experience. Here, the irreversible nature of duration endures (the common duration between distinct changing phenomena does not change but endures) independently of the observer’s choice of system of reference or phenomenal constructivism. Here repetition is possible only in the immediate direct feeling of abstract blocs of space- time: sensations of rhythms repeat in the successive series of vibrations bound together by inner continuity of intensive spatium. Beyond experience, intensive spatium defines a prior condition of expe- rience. In the essay entitled ‘The Method of Dramatization’, Deleuze suggests that a good question to engage with the intensive determina- tions of experience is not what is this? But who? How much? How? When? can this happen (2004: 94). In short, the method of dramatisa- tion entails pure differential activities governed not by the semantic web of signs but belonging to the passions of larval remarkable regions or points, deploying entire fields of individuation. These are prior condi- tions under which specifications occur: intensive sexes and not sexual identities, larval sexes and no agents of sex, rhythmic sexes and not repetitive sex. For Deleuze, what is virtually present ceaselessly dramatises through repetitions and resonances directly intervening in physical, biological and psychic dynamisms by a process of individuation where each difference is already virtually differentiated. Dramatisation therefore entails the productive activities of a yet to be actualised individuation. It concerns the agitations of pre-individual particle-forces that coincide not with this or that sexuality, with being queer, with the experience of being queer. What indeed queerness is implicated into is the dramatisation of virtual sexes, the spatio-temporal constellations of sexualities defining how queerness is given in sexual experience, a multiplicity of sexes that do not revolve around being queer itself. Here dramatisation entails not the performativity of material- discursive signs, phenomena-in-things constituting sexuality or queer- ness as the intra-action between the real and the phenomenal, the web of activities defining agential reality in history, which accounts for the speci- ficity of the complex relations between human and non-human, natural and artificial components under a specific situation: the observational cut. This posthuman performativity indeed addresses not the discursive apparatus that enables sexuality to enter a regime of repeatability of signs that can in turn subvert the discursive structure, but an apparatus that includes the material body as directly implicated in the observational construction of the meaning of how matter comes to matter. And yet, while posthuman queerness remains preoccupied with the per- formativity of signs attached to matter and constituting a new ontology for sexuality, the method of dramatisation is concerned with how queer- ness becomes individuated in the first place, how many sexes are impli- cated in the abstract machinism of desire? What enters repetition here are not already defined phenomena-in-things, the being queer, but the abstract or virtual microsexual multiplicities ingressing singular compositions, individualities, that correspond to them. ‘[T]he image of murmuring, or the ocean, or a water mill . . .’ (Deleuze 2004: 101), the chaos prehended in an individual unity never dispenses of the chaos but enters a multifolded transformation, an infinite series of inflections or becomings, according to a how, how much, who. In other words, according to veritable specifica- tions of virtual sexes concretely experienced and yet devoid of all funda- mental ontologies of sex, queer, homosexual, heterosexual. The method of dramatisation allows for the pure experience of desiring-machines, the direct prehension of microsexes enveloped in intensive spatio-temporal co-ordinates including the atomic and sub- atomic levels of matter, agitating throughout an intensive spatium, detracting the experience of sexuality from the psycho-biological ground of identification, and thus facing the deepest wound engulfing all kinds of sexes. It is from the obscure depths, the abyss of such an infinite wound that sexuality is dramatised to enter a future of sexual mutation. For a philosophy of immanent desire to become relevant to queer theory, sexuality has to be housed by intensive spatio-temporal regions expressing the how, how much, when of the becomings of sex. Sexuality is not the ultimate order of the symbolic but the desire primarily impli- cated in the abstract feeling of what happens to the world, when mental, affective, social, aesthetic assemblages transversally combined across all scales of matter, deploy the singular engineering of each world as an event, a pure occurrence of sex. What still characterises most of our understand- ing of the male body is what Derrida calls phallocentrism and phallo- gocentrism (Derrida 1987: 191), by which masculinist discourse insists on a binaric logic that subsumes the second term to the first both in terms of value and of status. At the heart of this problematic lies the taboo against the sensuous male body, a taboo the breaching of which is traditionally named ‘femi- nine’. The development of the concept of the behind not only explores its links with a chain of equivalences that binds most representations of the penetrated male body to a culturally abjected ‘feminine paradigm’, however. The behind also – as both discursive ‘blind spot’ and erotic site of anxiety for many men – articulates a specifically modern ‘poetics’ – a poetics of instability, uncertainty and fluidity of meaning. This poetics is a way of re-stating a logic of the neither/nor as presented in Deleuze’s work, both the single-authored texts and those co-authored with Félix Guattari. As a vertiginously ongoing process of becoming, philosophy, accord- ing to Deleuze, is always already a queer practice, a question of taking past thinkers from behind, sharing, with Jean-François Lyotard, the dream of producing ‘a philosophy of sodomites’ (Lyotard 1993: 258). In Dialogues Deleuze describes his process of writing about other philoso- phers, such as Kant, Nietzsche and Bergson: the main way I coped with it at the time was to see the history of philoso- phy as a sort of buggery or (it comes to the same thing) immaculate con- ception. I saw myself as taking an author from behind and giving him a child that would be his own off-spring, yet monstrous. (Deleuze 1995: 6, empha- sis added) Leaving aside the notion that buggery and immaculate conception might amount to the same thing, if we assume that Deleuze isn’t just being provocative here, and take seriously the claim that the history of philosophy can be viewed ‘as a sort of buggery’, then a profoundly erotic mode of engagement emerges at the heart of western thinking.1 In ways that are unimaginable to the philosophical tradition that separates and hierarchises the mind from the body, conceptual thinking from corporeal being, such a move folds the body into the mind such that the verb ‘to penetrate’ is made to vibrate with the full valency of that move: to know becomes profoundly corporeal. Given that buggery isn’t a one-way street, what are the consequences not only of taking an author from behind, but also of being taken from behind by an author? What kind of monstrous offspring would be born from that coupling? I am trying to articulate a new way of thinking about bodies – specifi- cally male bodies – that doesn’t rely on the usual binary oppositions of gender as represented by the phallic economy. I want to suggest and explore alternative ways of thinking through and about the male body as a site of penetrability, not just physical but also, and importantly, psy- chical or existential. Further, I want to suggest that all representation is the embodiment of erotic thought. By this I mean that what exists in terms of representation, far from being neutral or disinterested, or self-evident, or objective, is, rather, and importantly, an encoded response to being a body, having sen- sations, desires, which significantly contour our representations of the world in which those sensations, desires and bodies take place – even when, or especially when, those desires and sensations are being ignored, feared or denied. I want to suggest at the same time that there are pro- tocols of representation that govern and direct what gets represented and how, and that these protocols, as much as what form representation takes, are expressions of sensation, of being a particular body in a par- ticular culture at a particular time. As such, I am arguing for a radical continuity between mind and body, against the traditional separation or discontinuity of those two terms, a separation that has been attributed to Descartes, and is known – for better or for worse – as the Cartesian split. That separation is itself a consequence of representation and not a given, a priori ‘reality’. Subjectivity is not so neatly packaged, and objectivity does not parade towards us in pairs like animals entering the ark. Further, that separation into binary opposites violently hierarchises the two terms, and in the case of the mind/body opposition, that structuration is gendered such that it is the repression or denial or conceptual feminisa- tion of the body that seeps into and shapes the representations of ‘mind’, ‘culture’, ‘reason’, etc. I want to challenge the standard approaches to masculine embodiment that explain it as a form of denial or absence: instead, I would like to suggest that the male body – in its always already penetrated state – is a presence, an excess; one that I will name the ‘behind’ in order to suggest that penetration is a condition of modern masculine subjectivity. I main- tain that the submission by which ‘masculinity’ conforms to the protocols of representation, or, to put it another way, registers within the socio- symbolic order, is effected by a process of penetration that remainders the male body, marking it as ‘waste’ and associating it with a pejorative fem- ininity. Through the traditional cultural associations that exist between the concept ‘body’ and the concept ‘woman’, the name ‘feminine’ is given to any breach of the taboo against penetrating the male body. In this sense, the ‘behind’ as I am using it attempts to name the non- conceptual, and such non-conceptuality is brought to bear on the concept of the male ‘body’. In other words, the ‘behind’ registers both as discur- sive aporia and corporeal liminality. Modern male subjectivity, as such, is revealed as a highly unstable process. Penetrability becomes a condi- tion of the emergence of modern male subjectivity within the rubric of its own logic. One major consequence of such conditionality is that thought must be seen as in a very real sense ‘embodied’, and that this process of embodying thought is predicated upon an eroticism that is subsequently denied. The ‘behind’ names that denial. But it also names the process by which that denial is itself denied, and the openness and penetrability of the male body explored and affirmed. As such, the penetrated male body appears not as the radical other of traditional western masculinity, but rather as what David Savran calls its ‘pathologized double’ (Savran 1998: 27); as that which lurks behind it like a shadow. Central to this endeavour – and to the reading of Schreber presented here – is the notion of a boundary, both physical and psychological/exis- tential, and, following this, a concern with the openings of the male body. Why are the body’s openings so disturbing to the concept of unified subjectivity? And why is their penetration considered so danger- ous? Is the closed body a result of the foreclosing of language, or is lan- guage modelled on the ideality of a safely closed body enclosing a safely closed subject? Can opening one open the other, like Chinese boxes? Can the movements and flows of an opened body be represented, or does rep- resentation itself only function upon a foreclosure of such nomadic flesh? In this way, the term ‘behind’ tries to make a clear link between the so-called crisis of masculinity and the so-called crisis of reason. To char- acterise a certain anxiety that is common to both corporeal and intel- lectual uncertainty, the full erotic charge of the term behind – as a homograph that binds together a physical as well as an epistemological location – must be allowed to fluctuate between those two significations and vibrate with the movement thus described. As Deleuze writes in The Fold: ‘fluctuation of the norm replaces the permanence of a law’ (Deleuze 1993: 19). Indeed, writing the behind is so inherently fraught with the dangers of this double entendre that the foundations of mas- culine discourse themselves are revealed as anything but secure. The male behind and its attendant cultural anxieties are linked here to the ‘behind’ of discourse, to what lurks behind, and thus, by extension, to analysis itself, that intellectual process of exposing what is hidden, of penetrating the unknown. In Anti-Oedipus, Deleuze and Guattari famously corrupt the concept of ‘subjectivity’, fragmenting our understanding of what it means to be an individual in order to explore other ways of being a subject, ways not predicated on separation and loss in the post-Freudian manner, but more on a becoming without ontology or telos, or rather a becoming as ontol- ogy and telos. To quote Claire Colebrook, with this move ‘they chal- lenged the idea that there was anything like a “psyche” at all’ (Colebrook 2002: 5). Deleuze and Guattari develop a theory of subjectivity which posits the subject as a residue of the processes of coding and overcoding by which the flows and multiplicities of the social body are mapped and restrained, or, as they say, territorialised. The chaotic unravelling of these restraints – as in cases of psychosis, such as Schreber’s – they call decod- ing. They argue that in advanced societies such as ours decoding and coding are almost indistinguishable processes. That is, the high levels of complexity found in modern life necessitate an understanding of the subject as always already fractured, or what they call ‘schizzo’. In short, fragmentation at the level of the ego is the inevitable outcome of modern overcoding. Because of this, their form of ‘schizo-analysis’ regards the so- called psychotic as having something fundamentally profound to say about the nature of the processes of overcoding by which the body is repressed. Furthermore, they link these processes to the original privati- sation of the anus – the first erogenous zone that the infant learns to repu- diate, by repressing its possibilities for pleasure. They adopt the Freudian notion of the anus as ‘the symbol of everything that is to be repudiated and excluded from life’ (Freud 1977: 104n). It is a process, however, which – due in part to the close proximity of the anus to the genitals – remains profoundly contradictory and unstable. For Freud, anal eroti- cism is never fully repressed. Deleuze and Guattari argue that the anus was ‘the first organ to suffer privatization, removal from the social field’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1983: 143); as a consequence ‘the entire history of primitive coding, of despotic overcoding, and of the decoding of private man’ is founded on ‘the model and memory of the disgraced anus’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1983: 211). They argue that the process of language acquisition is not only governed by the primacy of the phallus as the master signifier, as Lacan proposes, but also that the acts of separation and rejection characteristic of defe- cation prefigure the differentiation techniques of signification. In other words, language is not only acquired through the removal of the anus from any social function, but also through the displacement of the processes of shitting onto the systematic use and application of language structures. This process of psycho-corporeal separation and differentia- tion sets up a strategy mirrored in the process of making sense of words, establishing an inherent link between the scatological and the lexical that can be found in Schreber’s Kristeva makes a similar claim in Revolution in Poetic Language, when she writes that Language acquisition implies the suppression of anality; in other words, it represents the acquisition of a capacity for symbolization through the defin- itive detachment of the rejected object, through its repression under the sign. (Kristeva 1984: 152) For Kristeva, poetic language continues to retain and express a certain aspect of anality, a certain jouissance associated with the anal. Similarly, Deleuze and Guattari argue that the privatisation or overcoding by which the public self is consolidated and its desires held in check takes as its model the sublimation of anality. According to this, learning when to shit and when not to shit are coterminous with learning what to say and what not to say. Both are a form of discipline. Bodily regulation of flows and discursive decorum go hand in hand. Entry into the symbolic order would seem to foreclose the possibility of certain, more open (and therefore dangerous) experiences of desire, except perhaps in the realm of the imag- inary, a realm whose co-ordinates become structured by the very unspeak- ability in which desire is held. For this reason, Deleuze and Guattari – like Kristeva – insist that the flow of desire in its least restrained and most chaotic form is inherently revolutionary. Through the experience and articulation of what is in excess of the overcoding’s strictures the inherent fallability of those strictures is exposed. This complex relationship between language and the body plays itself out in interesting and infor- mative ways in the text I wish to turn to now, Memoirs of My Nervous Illness by Daniel Paul Schreber. Here, the appearance of the penetrated male body disrupts not only the psychic map of the self, but also the plateau of language, displacing, like a root bursting through paving stones, the neat patterns of language and meaning; the anus becomes not only a metaphor for some kind of psychosis but also a metonym for the male body itself: ‘the behind’ both appears and disappears at the same time; seems furthest when closest to hand. Daniel Paul Schreber (1842–1911) suffered two serious mental break- downs during his adult life, for which he was institutionalised both times. He worked in the German courts and was successful enough to be appointed Senatpräsident or presiding judge of the third chamber of the Supreme Court of Appeals at the age of fifty-one, the youngest man ever to be appointed to that position. The first breakdown in 1884 followed his failure to be elected for the National Liberal Party, and his primary symptom was hypochondria. He spent six months in a clinic run by Dr Paul Flechsig, the same doctor to whom he turned eight years later when his second breakdown occurred, which was also the outcome of a certain failure of his civic role. A month after taking up his new prestigious post of Senatpräsident, Schreber’s anxiety over his ability to perform this task was such that hospitalisation was required again, this time for a period of nine years. This time, however, his main symptoms were delusional and paranoid. His delirium was grounded in the belief that, in the words of the medical expert’s report: he is called to redeem the world and to bring back to mankind the lost state of Blessedness. He maintains he has been given this task by direct divine inspiration. [. . .] The most essential part of his mission of redemption is that it is necessary for him first of all to be transformed into a woman. (cited Schreber 1988: 272) Schreber’s transformation into a woman was to be achieved by an act of divine penetration, to keep it within what Schreber called the Order of the World. The fact that beyond his own ‘mad cosmology’ such trans- formation was not within the order of things, but the sign of a radical psychosis, tells us as much about that order – its limits, its laws and stric- tures – as it does about Schreber’s ‘madness’. Upon his release in 1902, Schreber began writing Memoirs of My Nervous Illness, based on the notes he had been keeping since 1897. It was published in 1903, and the text was given to Freud sometime in the summer of 1910 by Jung. Freud published his own interpretation of the Schreber case in 1911, the year of Schreber’s death.3 The two men never met. Several months before the onslaught of his psychosis, Schreber recalls having the following experience: One morning while still in bed (whether still half asleep or already awake I cannot remember), I had a feeling which, thinking about it later when fully awake, struck me as highly peculiar. It was the idea that it really must be rather pleasant to be a woman succumbing to intercourse. (Schreber 1988: 63) This lazy, hazy, half-dream of sexual submission occurs within and establishes a limit: a border zone or fold, between the unconscious state of sleep and the conscious state of wakefulness. While submission is clearly aligned with ‘becoming-woman’, its contemplation provokes ambiguity, instability, forgetfulness (‘whether still half asleep or already awake I cannot remember’). An idea considered ‘highly peculiar’ when revisited in the cold light of day was, within the relative safety of a dream- like state, thought ‘rather pleasant’. This zone or fold, this ‘dream’, has been isolated by Freud as the cause and origin of the Senatpräsident’s mental breakdown, and is interpreted by him as a simple homosexual wish-fulfilment, which he derives from Schreber’s delusional belief in his becoming a woman. Unlike Freud, Deleuze and Guattari want to know what Schreber can teach us, rather than seeing him simply as ‘mad’; they see his position outside of ‘normality’ as lending his story critical weight; heuristics rather than hermeneutics, schizoanalysis rather than interpretation. They refuse to locate Schreber’s breakdown within the framework of the triadic Oedipal unit,4 even in the broader form of Freud’s formulation offered by Lacan in the shape of the symbolic order. Deleuze and Guattari prefer to locate Schreber’s psychosis within a politico-cultural context which interprets his witnessing as a reaction to, and movement against, the totalising forces of capitalist and psychoanalytic normativity. And they associate his experiences with the privatisation of the body by dis- course, its colonisation by language. Furthermore, they place Schreber’s anus at the centre of his psychosis, as the primary point of his miracu- lous body, a zone of intensity as productive as it is destructive: ‘Doubtless the former paranoiac machine continues to exist in the form of mocking voices that attempt to “de-miraculate” the organs, the Judge’s anus in particular’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1983: 11). They use the anus and its status as the original taboo in order to propose a less structured theory of desire, one which may account for the bodily flows so feared by identity thinking in general. Deterritorialisation of the body threatens subjective coherence, but this tension produces something that can be expressed in language. They write: Judge Schreber has sunbeams in his ass. A solar anus.5 And rest assured that it works: Judge Schreber feels something, produces something, and is capable of explaining the process theoretically. (Deleuze and Guattari 1983: 2) Schreber’s behind is certainly the source of both great anxiety and great pleasure throughout the Memoirs. He refers to a process of ‘pic- turing . . . female buttocks on my body . . . whenever I bend down’  (Schreber 1988: 181) – as if his body were a tabula rasa – anticipating God’s penetration, anticipating, even inviting, an ‘intimacy with the gods without seeing their faces’ (Lyotard 1993: 15). He demonstrates an enthusiastic preoccupation with the scatological (a word which, lit- erally, means the science, the logic, of shit). ‘Like everything else in my body’, writes Schreber, ‘the need to empty myself is also called forth by miracles’ (Schreber 1988: 177). Therefore, his struggle to hold onto his shit is a struggle for supremacy against Divine omnipotence, a classic Freudian characteristic of the infant’s anal phase (Freud 1977: 205–15). However, this act of rebellion is used against him, and he is made to feel too stupid to shit, making the act itself a defiant one (Schreber 1988: 178). Stupidity leads to God’s withdrawal, and God’s withdrawal results in pain being inflicted on Schreber. Therefore, he is caught between holding onto his faeces in order to retain his sense of reason, and the urge to empty his bowels because doing so always results in ‘a very strong development of soul-voluptuousness’ (Schreber 1988: 178) and soul-voluptuousness attracts God, who then re-enters him. In short, like Freud’s infant, Schreber enjoys defecating. Already, we can see the confused yet productive tension generated by these two contra- dictory states and the lack of any form of reconciliation. The fact that the divine miracle rays induce in Schreber the need to defecate ‘every day at least several dozen times’ (Schreber 1988: 177) indicates a highly charged – indeed, vertiginous – anal eroticism. ‘The President’s arse will pass into solar incandescence’, as Lyotard comments (Lyotard 1993: 59). Much has been made of Schreber’s Grundsprache, or basic language – the language in which God addresses him. For Freud, it is the language of the unconscious, containing residues of the symbolic relations as found in dream analysis (Freud 1974: 201). One thing is clearly certain, and that is that the basic language Schreber talks about is inherently ambivalent about the meaning of words, rendering meaning unstable. Schreber writes that it is ‘especially characterised by its great wealth of euphemisms’ (Schreber 1988: 13). This ‘ground-speak’ proves vertigi- nously ungrounded, or groundless. While it constitutes a system – what Schreber calls the ‘writing-down-system’ – it remains nevertheless extraordinarily difficult to explain to other people even vaguely. That it exists is overwhelmingly proved to me day after day; yet it belongs even for me to the realm of the unfathomable because the objective it pursues must be recognised by all who know human nature as something in itself unat- tainable. It is obviously a stop-gap measure and it is difficult to decide whether it arises from a wrong (that is contrary to the Order of the World) intent or from faulty reasoning. (Schreber 1988: 119) Wrong intent or faulty reasoning – these are the proposed origins of Schreber’s basic language. As a consequence, Schreber claims that what- ever is said in this basic language, the reverse meaning is intended. For example, Schreber tells us that ‘souls which had not yet undergone the process of purification were not, as one would expect, called ‘non-tested souls’, but the exact reverse, namely ‘tested souls’ (Schreber 1988: 50). Such a reversal of meaning indicates not only a violent breach between signifier and signified, but also an about-face, which, for Jean-François Rabain, constitutes a sodomising of language, language flipped over onto its belly and taken from behind. Rabain renders Grundsprache in the French (langue fondamentale) to make explicit its anality, its connection to the fundament (see also Niederland 1984: 43). Such reversibility places the ambiguous quality of language close to the sexual ambiguity acting itself out on Schreber’s body (Rabain 1988: 63, 65). ‘The basic language’, writes Jean-François Rabain, ‘questions the value of the sign, its annulment, and its function of reversibility by allow- ing the free play of ambivalence and the transformation into the con- trary’ (Rabain 1988: 68, emphasis added). Schreber’s transformation into a woman is coterminous, then, with a breakdown in meaning, his equivocal flesh mirroring his equivocal language, and vice versa. As Lecercle points out, for Schreber, language is directly connected with the body; nerve speech, as its name indi- cates, is language embodied [. . .] as it is also the cause of voluptuous sen- sations, there is a concordance between grammar and physical pleasure [. . .] the persecution of which he is a victim takes the form of a dereliction of grammar. (Lecercle 1985: 126) Not only did Schreber believe that the ‘basic-language’ used by the rays came from outside, but the ‘writing-down-system’ by which Schreber’s experiences are recorded is equally a phenomenon of exteriority: ‘I cannot say with certainty who does the writing down’, he confesses (Schreber 1988: 119). The sovereignty of the unified, identifiable subject is replaced here by a multiple personality. These multiple personas which inhabit Schreber – and which include ‘an Alsatian girl who had defended her honour against a victorious French officer’, and a ‘Hyperborian woman’ (Schreber 1988: 93) – all aid in the writing-down-system. As such, they undermine the position of author(ity): there is no ‘I’ from which the text springs, only a collaborative plague of voices. As Derrida writes, ‘we must be several in order to write’ (Derrida 1987: 226); and as Lecercle notes, such ‘proliferation is always a threat to order’ (Lecercle 1985: 95). This proliferation reaches a point for Schreber at which ‘the writing- down-material has increased to such an extent that it now includes almost all the words used in the human language’ (Schreber 1988: 222). Stretched across the supposedly stable language structure of reason, Schreber places, like a veil, a parallel language, the meaning of which is, word for word, the exact opposite of its corresponding homonym. All language, for Schreber, is homonymic, each word harbouring its chaotic twin, its opposite meaning, within its seemingly self-evident appearance. Schreber’s becoming-woman/becoming-queer is exemplary of the ways in which the penetrated male body registers within discourse. It is a becoming-minoritarian not simply in the physical sense of the body and its sensations (which register and are read within a feminine paradigm), but also in the linguistic sense: loss of communication, a reversal of lan- guage’s meaning, attend its appearance. The process results in the pro- duction of a kind of assemblage that unsettles stable meanings and readings as it unsettles the question of the body. ‘Our sexual body is ini- tially a Harlequin’s cloak’ (Deleuze 1990: 197). In his study of Foucault, Deleuze usefully identifies the process of ‘visual assemblage’ by which ‘Panopticism’ operates, highlighting not only the role played by surveillance and discipline in the registering of the body, but also the fragmented and multiple nature of the body that results from this registration: its status as an assemblage (Deleuze 1986: 32). For Deleuze, the assemblage is ‘the minimum real unit’ (Deleuze and Parnet 1987: 51). Because it suggests something other than a totalised unity it functions to render all meaning inherently and immediately mul- tiple. Through what Deleuze terms a ‘sympathy’ or symbiosis, the assem- blage allows for ‘the penetration of bodies’ (Deleuze and Parnet 1987: 52) within fields of force that generate representation. Within an assem- blage ‘bodies interpenetrate, mix together, transmit affects to one another’ (Deleuze and Parnet 1987: 70). This fundamental gap, then, which Foucault and Deleuze have identified as the thing which makes possible the multiplicity and fragmentation of bodies and texts, is that through which such (inter)penetration occurs. The gap or hole – what I am calling the behind – is therefore primary in that it contours the field of representation while remaining stubbornly resistant to representation. The assemblage is a close relation or an alter ego/doppelganger of the rhizome, that other DeleuzoGuattarian concept which also lays claim to a radical and non-reducible multiplicity. In A Thousand Plateaus, the second volume of Deleuze and Guattari’s two-volume work on Capitalism and Schizophrenia, they develop a theory of the rhizome as an analytic process predicated on multiplicities rather than binarisms, series of difference rather than discreet identities in mutual opposition. In its botanical sense a rhizome is an underground tuber that ramifies and diversifies, producing new shoots, extensions into new territory. Deleuze and Guattari oppose it to what they call arboric systems of knowledge – based on the model of a tree – which solidify in visible and immovable forms (Deleuze and Guattari 1992: 5). The rhizome as they propose it is therefore both occluded and motional, a network of connections across which things flow and disperse. In this sense, it is a mapping, an in- between, a becoming, and as such is always minoritarian. The rhizome oscillates between the lines established by the arboric systems, and as such is ‘fuzzy’ rather than aggregated (Deleuze and Guattari 1992: 505–6). Like the Body without Organs it disrupts the idea of a unified totality by gesturing to an ‘elsewhere’ that is both incapable of being rep- resented and constitutive of representation. The kind of subjectivity suggested by the rhizome, then, is not singu- lar but multiple, inhabited by a radically constitutive and productive oth- erness. Furthermore, this rhizomatic subject is in a state of multiplicity contingent upon a shifting body, suggesting a constant rearrangement of the self which exceeds the ideality of a stable and unified ‘identity’. Having no centre, no structure, no unity, the rhizome exists in an intense (and intensely productive) state of disarray, or becoming, which makes generalisation through any act of representation impossible. The rhizome is therefore in a very real sense non-representable, and thinkable only through a concept of multiplicity that shatters the unity of the subject and the fixed meanings of logic. Rhizomorphosis is a radical state of frag- mentation such as cannot be accounted for within existing protocols of representation, such as language, but which nevertheless exists as a kind of chaos or chaosmosis suppurating underneath any representation. This means that if language is to be used to represent the material body, then it must confront those aspects of the body deemed ‘unfit’ for dis- cursive representation, such as sexuality or scatology. More, it must present the material body as something not reducible to enforced social categorisations based on anything so crass as mere anatomical sexual difference. As such, ‘the rhizome . . . is a liberation of sexuality not only from reproduction but also from genitality’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1992: 18). For what would be the ‘opposite’ sex for a man who experienced himself as somehow embodying both male and female? Becoming-woman/queer/minoritarian is precisely the process of unmanning as described by Schreber, which consisted in the (external) male genitals (penis and scrotum) being retracted into the body and the internal sexual organs being at the same time trans- formed into the corresponding female sexual organs. (Schreber 1988: 73) It is a process he claims to have experienced himself. He writes: ‘several times (particularly in bed) there were marked indications of an actual retraction of the male organ’ (Schreber 1988: 132). As the signifier of his social status recedes, his penetrability increases. It is also a process Schreber was clearly unhappy not only with experiencing but with recounting. ‘In order not to lose through such a confession the respect of other people whose opinion I value’, writes Schreber, he must endeavour to justify the importance of talking about such things. He must make sense of his exposure to and experience of penetration. To this end he explains: Few people have been brought up according to such strict moral principles as I, and have throughout life practised such moderation especially in matters of sex, as I venture to claim for myself. Mere low sensuousness can therefore not be considered a motive in my case; were satisfaction of my manly pride still possible, I would naturally much prefer it; nor would I ever betray any sexual lust in contact with other people. But as soon as I am alone with God, if I may so express myself, I must continually or at least at certain times, strive to give divine rays the impression of a woman in the height of sexual delight, to achieve this I have to employ all possible means, and have to strain all my intellectual powers and foremost my imagination. (Schreber 1988: 208) It thus becomes Schreber’s moral duty to ‘imagine myself as man and woman in one person having intercourse with myself, or somehow have to achieve with myself a certain sexual excitement etc. – which perhaps under other circumstances might be considered immoral’ (Schreber 1988: 208). To conform to God’s wishes, he strives to make ‘absolute passivity [his] duty’ (Schreber 1988: 145). There is thus not simply a reversal of gender in Schreber’s new world, but a reversal of morality – indeed, gender and morality become almost interchangeable terms, such that gender itself becomes a form of morality: there are ‘good’ genders and ‘bad’ genders. With this reversal, what Schreber knows to be unacceptable or immoral behaviour according to his strict moral upbringing, that is, ‘mere low sensuousness’, becomes not simply acceptable but obligatory. What had hitherto been the sign of ‘moral decay (“voluptuous excesses”)’ (Schreber 1988: 72) becomes instead the sign of moral duty. As Eric Santner argues, ‘Schreber discovers that power not only prohibits, moderates, says “no”, but may also work to intensify and amplify the body and its sensations’ (Santner 1996: 32). But in order to do so, Schreber must become-(a)woman. Within the late nineteenth-century discourse on sexuality and gender, Schreber’s experience of his body as ‘female’ could only be subsumed by and occasion madness, because within its mutually exclusive terms having a (male) body was always contingent on losing one’s mind. Excessive sensual pleasure in either men or women is often considered socially unacceptable but in women it is less often deemed ‘abnormal’ because ‘woman’ is always already ‘man’s’ Other, always already ‘body’, ‘unconscious’, ‘nature’, ‘sexuality’. In men, however, excessive physical pleasure tends to carry with it the danger of placing the body above the mind, and such sexualisation, being, at heart, a ‘feminization’, inevitably cancels out reason – the one thing that supposedly gives men their supe- riority over nature/woman/body. A rhizomatic body thus surpasses and eludes any simple taxonomic move that would confine it to one of two gender groups based on geni- talia. By its very nature, its recognition can only serve to disrupt such tax- onomic logic. Endlessly productive, ‘a rhizome may be broken, shattered at a given spot, but it will start up again on one of its old lines, or on new lines’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1992: 9, emphasis added). And these new lines, these experimental, code-breaking nomadic metamorphoses of words, are capable of folding bodies within the very discourse out of which they have been excised. In short: language brings us closer to the material body when it stops making sense, or when it constantly under- mines the sense that is being made. Or, rather, the sense that is made is more rooted in sensation, in sense as an experience, a feeling, a limit, rather than – as it is commonly interpreted – as ‘meaning’. Put yet another way, language brings us closer to the material body when it makes us feel rather than think, when it is a becoming rather than a being. As Deleuze and Guattari state: ‘becomings are minoritarian; all becoming is becoming-minoritarian’. Thus, lurking ‘behind President Schreber’s paranoid secret all along’ was ‘a becoming-feminine, a becom- ing-woman’ because ‘only a minority is capable of serving as the active medium of becoming’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1992: 289, 291). Given the body’s minor (and thus minatory) status within discourse, one could add to the list of becomings becoming-body; and becoming-body is always becoming-body-without-organs, always a becoming-disorganised, depraved. Schreber’s acceptance of his role as ‘God’s whore’, though, is by no means immediate. His initial response is one of resistance; he battles against this unmanning by which he is to be robbed not only of his mas- culinity but of his reason: ‘my whole sense of manliness and manly honour, my entire moral being, rose up against it’, he writes (Schreber 1988: 76). For Schreber, to become unmanned – to become a woman – is coterminous with losing one’s Reason (Schreber 1988: 78–9, 99). Schreber’s unmanning is intimately connected to – and signified by – an extreme bodily jouissance, or what Schreber himself calls ‘voluptuous- ness’, a feeling of intense pleasure he tells us is usually only attainable after death, when a ‘state of blessedness’ is bestowed upon the disem- bodied soul (Schreber 1988: 50–2). Voluptuousness, in turn, is connected to the nerve language through which God’s rays speak to Schreber by penetrating him and causing his body to be experienced as the site of sen- suality. Important here is the sexual difference Schreber ascribes to these nerves of voluptuousness, for, Schreber argues, while they occupy the whole of a woman’s body, in a man’s body they remain solely in the gen- itals. He writes: my whole body is filled with nerves of voluptuousness from the top of my head to the soles of my feet, such as is the case only in the adult female body, whereas in the case of a man, as far as I know, nerves of voluptuous-ness are only found in and immediately around the sexual organs. (Schreber 1988: 204) At the heart of Schreber’s psychosis, then, is a certain pleasure or jouis- sance he considers to be specific to female flesh, a becoming-woman which is also, always, a becoming-minoritarian, a becoming-queer. Deleuze and Guattari use Schreber’s Memoirs to demonstrate the pro- ductivity of the desiring-machine and the impossible multiplicity of the body without organs – a patchwork of fragments, a multiplicity that is residual within discourse and characteristic of everything that discourse articulates: in short, an assemblage, or a becoming. If desire can ‘only be understood as a category of “production” ’ (Deleuze 2004: 232), then what it produces is a surface, a body without organs. In the Memoirs, Schreber receives instructions from God’s rays such as ‘do not think about certain parts of your body’ (Schreber 1988: 141). Schreber is the Ur-body without organs. Consider this extract from the medical officer’s report: He maintains that in the earlier years of his illness he suffered destruction of individual organs of his body, of a kind which would have brought death to every other human being, that he lived for a long time without stomach, without intestines, bladder, almost without lungs, with smashed ribs, torn gullet, that he had at times eaten part of his own larynx with his food, etc. (Schreber 1988: 272) Thus the BwO constitutes a different organisation of the body, a disor- ganisation, consisting of several strata, and ‘behind each stratum, encasted in it, there is always another stratum’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1992: 159) – the BwO is a multiplicity. It thus constitutes a challenge to the conformity to which bodies are exposed, the command that ‘You will be organized, you will be an organism, you will articulate your body – otherwise you’re just depraved’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1992: 159). It is an erotic depravity that dissolves organisation of the body’s intensities, that loses control of its mastery over sensations. It is also a resistance to indi- viduation. It is not a question of having a Body without Organs, but of existing upon it – ‘it’ being nothing more, though nothing less, than ‘con- nection of desires, conjunction of flows, continuum of intensities’. There isn’t one BwO, but infinite numbers, according to how one experiments, but at the same time all BwO are the same experience of disorganisation. It is an impossible multiplicity – impossible not because it cannot exist, but because it cannot be thought: ‘the body without organs is closed on a full depth without limits and without exteriority’ (Deleuze 1990: 198). It is a concept that re-imagines the lineaments of desire, a concept that disorganises the body, a concept of such primary nomadism that it refuses to be grasped definitively. A concept that slips the noose of defi- nition not by remaining hopelessly abstract but by insisting on such radical concreteness that it remains not only impossible to represent but impossible to think. It is a concept of difference that extends into an infin- ity that is not merely virtual but all too breathtakingly real: the infinity of being, the event of consciousness itself. I agree with Garber but would also insist that to effect a return to Anzaldúa’s work would give us queer theory largely unrecognisable to its present self. This is because the specificity of Anzaldúa’s thinking cannot be grasped through the philosophical per- spectives that are currently hegemonic in social sciences and the human- ities. I have here in mind the all-but-complete deconstruction of ontology and metaphysics that Elizabeth Grosz, for example, has addressed in her recent work (Grosz 2004 and 2005; see also Haslanger 2000; Oksala 2005). We can understand the historical reasons behind ontology’s criti- cal fortunes: the sweep of ontological inquiry has seemed to require the reduction of difference to identity, of multiplicity to a universalism, of the human to the man. Seeking to theorise the nature and conditions of exis- tence, ontology, it is argued, proceeds by obfuscating life’s actual variety and complexity, and, as feminism has pointed out, such reduction has traditionally taken place according to criteria where hegemonic particu- larities are universalised and where other perspectives, such as women’s, are rendered partial, inadequate or, simply, inconceivable. Yet, the (often unacknowledged or unnamed) rejection of ontology makes it difficult, if not impossible, to read much of Anzaldúa’s work. Her uncomfortable fit with the most efficiently institutionalised queer approaches can be detected in the work of critics who, taking their cue from Butler’s Hegelian-inflected theory of performativity, find her argu- ments ‘utopian’ (see Jagose 1994: ch. 6; Raiskin 1994). I propose that we are unable to understand Anzaldúa’s philosophy unless we grant that her thinking proceeds from an ontological framework. For example, her insistence on the ‘metaphysics of interconnectedness’ becomes a naïve generalisation if we do not understand, precisely, the metaphysical reach of her argument.1 What I here seek is a kind of an involution to 1987, a potential actual- isation of Anzaldúa’s metaphysics, which I argue has not been seriously considered, perhaps not even recognised, by queer theory’s profoundly deconstructive discipline. Taking Anzaldúa’s paradigmatic orientation seriously, this essay develops a notion of ‘queer hybridity’ through her work, especially by placing it in dialogue with theories of mixedness, mes- tizaje and creolization in African-American and post-colonial theories, which I argue provide a more resonant context for reading Anzaldúa than contemporary queer thinking. Of course, within these fields, one must make further distinctions. In terms of post-colonial theory, I am here thinking of theorists such as Edouard Glissant rather than, say, Homi Bhabha. While Bhabha understands hybridity as ‘the effect of colonial power’ (Bhabha 1994: 112), for Anzaldúa mestizaje is, in the final analysis, an ontological condition. As Anzaldúa writes in her preface to this bridge we call home: ‘Biologically, we are a single gene pool with minor variations and superficial cultural and genetic differences; we are interconnected with all life’ (Anzaldúa 2002b: 5). While such metaphysics becomes more pronounced in her subsequent texts, it orients her think- ing already in Borderlands/La Frontera. It is articulated through the notions of both spirit and evolution, two terms that have been largely greeted with an embarrassed silence in her reception by queer theorists. ‘We’re supposed to forget,’ Anzaldúa tells us, ‘that every cell in our bodies, every bone and bird and worm has spirit in it’ (Anzaldúa 1987: 36). She suggests in later interviews that this forgetfulness is behind the insistent silence around her arguments about spirituality in academic dis- cussions of her work (Anzaldúa 2000: 7, 144, 161). This silence, one may further note, is matched by the systematic neglect of her evolutionary thinking, which, at best, is considered in metaphoric terms or thought of as a performatively insubordinate repetition of the discourses of racial sci- ences and the evolutionary schema of José Vasconcelos.2 The two omis- sions seem to me connected, both symptomatic of the disorientation caused by the incommensurability of Anzaldúa’s paradigm with current theoretical hegemonies. In Anzaldúa, references to spirit and evolution name the same thing: an ontology of interconnectedness and becoming. I suggest, then, that the embarrassment of such concepts is the embarrass- ment of metaphysics, perhaps that of an unabashed monism in Anzaldúa’s thinking. For Anzaldúa, evolution – that is, the world’s relentless change and becoming – is enabled by the consistency of being (by spirit) and the ontological interconnectedness of bodies, the fact that bodies resonate with others, find themselves partially replicated in other bodies. I turn to Deleuze’s philosophy as a productive point of reference for thinking Anzaldúa’s ontology. I am not, of course, the first to suggest this linkage. Deleuze has been cited in Anzaldúa scholarship, as often sym- pathetically as critically. Most often, his work is referred to in passing to illustrate aspects of Anzaldúa’s thinking (Hicks 1991: 109; Kaplan 1990: 360–1; Oliver Rotger 2001: 192 n6; Perles Rochel 2002: 234); at times he is evoked implicitly with the use of terms, such as ‘deterritorializa- tions’, associated with his philosophy (Hall 1999: 100). Such brief refer- ences – often inadequately motivated and contextualised3 – have in turn elicited criticism, such as Linda Martin Alcoff’s, who contrasts Anzaldúa’s account of mestizaje’s pain and difficulty to what she consid- ers Deleuze and Guattari’s romanticised and celebratory nomadology (Alcoff 2006: 257). Agreeing with Alcoff that claiming philosophical connections must be done carefully, I do not seek to identify Anzaldúa’s philosophy with Deleuze’s. Nevertheless, whatever specific points of harmony, discord, similarity, divergence, correspondence or tension one can locate between the two thinkers, it seems to me imperative to insist on the paradigmatic agreement between their projects: diverging from practically all their contemporaries, they are engaged in ontological con- templation.4 Moreover, it is important to problematise Alcoff’s reduction of Deleuze’s theories of becoming to slick celebrations of mobility and transformation. She is not alone in dismissing philosophies of affirma- tion, force and will-to-power as symptomatic of the theorist’s privileged immunity to pain, loss and melancholia – or, at worst, of his or her proto- fascism. Yet, Deleuzian affirmation must be understood in its Nietzschean meaning, where what are affirmed are active forces in their characteristic trajectories, where ‘the noble affirms the return, not the cessation of desire, and so the return of suffering’ (Roberts 1998: 166). Affirmation does not inoculate one against difficulty, suffering or disap- pearance; neither does it make any particular loss or extinction inevitable. If the philosophy of affirmation embraces the ‘fundamental yes’ of desire and active forces (Deleuze and Guattari 1998: 244), it also affirms the open-ended struggle between such forces. A philosophy of affirmation such as Nietzsche’s does not assert the stability and identity of forces but seeks to think how they become through clashes and encounters with other forces. One can argue that, throughout her work, Anzaldúa maps the contact zones of such struggles.5 Through Anzaldúa’s work, this essay thinks about the potentialities that an ontological turn would open for queer theory. If one of the per- ceived dangers of ontology has been its seeming affirmation of what exists – and, hence, its allegedly conservative character – clearly with Deleuze and Anzaldúa we move from an ontology of being to that of becoming. Both Anzaldúa’s and Deleuze’s are ontologies of futurity – ontologies ‘rooted in becoming rather than being’ (Grosz n.d.: n.p.). Whatever differences, divergences and discords we find between their philosophies, they are both concerned with thinking about the becoming of an interrelated universe. Anzaldúa’s ambitious system posits a ‘cosmovisión’ (Anzaldúa 2002: 540) that is characterised above all by ‘the metaphysics of interconnect- edness’. This interconnectedness is actualised in cohering bodies (human or otherwise) that are made up of smaller particles – what Anzaldúa sometimes calls ‘subpersonalities’ (Anzaldúa 2000: 242) – held loosely together. Because some of these smaller ‘particles’ are shared with other bodies of various scales and realms, Anzaldúa speaks of bodies’ inter- penetration: ‘The self does not stop with just you, with your body. The self penetrates other things and they penetrate you’ (Anzaldúa 2000: 162). She underlines bodies’ composite nature, the fact that ‘[o]ne’s own body is not one entity’: you’re all the different organisms and parasites that live on your body and also the ones that live in a symbiotic relationship to you. The mouth!!! The mouth has tons of bacteria and foreign stuff. Animals live in symbiotic rela- tionships – the cows with little birds picking the ticks off. So who are you? You’re not one single entity. You’re a multiple entity. (Anzaldúa 2000: 158) For Anzaldúa, we might say, ‘each individual is an infinite multiplicity’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1987: 254), a multiplicity that is partially shared with other bodies. Here, ‘bodies are made up of parasites, symbionts which infiltrate the systems of the host’ (Ansell Pearson 1999: 163). In thus problematising boundaries and categories – particularly in her later work, boundaries not only between human individuals but between the human and the non-human6 – Anzaldúa is clearly engaged in question- ing what Keith Ansell Pearson calls ‘the Western tradition of ontotheol- ogy’, with its ‘bias . . . in favour of self-sufficiency and closed boundaries (a conception of life that is not without its political articulations and implications).’ In rethinking evolutionary theory by problematising borders, she demonstrates that ‘absolute boundaries are radically anti- evolutionary since they entail stasis’ (Ansell Pearson 1999: 166–7). In other words, by insisting on the interconnectedness of bodies, Anzaldúa’s metaphysics emphasises evolutionary change, its relentless becoming, while at the same time rejecting ‘the anthropocentrism that is in-built in so much evolutionary, biological, scientific, and philosophical thought’ (Braidotti 2005/2006: para. 21). Hers is a philosophy that, like Rosi Braidotti’s ‘nomadic eco-philosophy,’ ‘sponsors a subject that is com- posed of external forces, of the non-human, inorganic or technological kind. It is territorially based, and thus environmentally bound’ (Braidotti 2005/2006: para. 24). Anzaldúa’s philosophy has exerted an obvious (if ambivalent) appeal for queer theorists because of her explicit elaboration of her metaphysics as a system of queerness, a queer theory. That is, hers is a metaphysics not only of interconnectedness, but of constitutive crossing, of a move- ment athwart – atravesar – which Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick traces as queer’s etymology (Sedgwick 1993: xii). The new mestiza is the point of articulation or expression of this crossing. Emerging ‘[a]t the confluence of two or more genetic streams, with chromosomes constantly “crossing over” ’ (Anzaldúa 1987: 77), she, like queers as atravesados, ‘supreme crossers of cultures’ (Anzaldúa 1987: 84), is a connective point between established entities and identities, seemingly distinct lineages, histories and temporalities. Yet, her profoundly metaphysical stance is likely to render her philosophy unrecognisable to queer theory. Anzaldúa’s atrav- esados are not primarily subjects well versed in the performative acts of subversive imitation. Rather, queer crossing in Anzaldúa is an ontologi- cal condition, a characteristic of being itself. This ontology of interconnectedness assumes a universe that is hybridised through queer bodies. Anzaldúa finds these queer bodies – or perhaps the same queer body – lodged in otherwise dissimilar cul- tures with discrete histories: ‘I am all races because there is the queer of me in all races’ (Anzaldúa 1987: 80). This ‘queer of me’ is an unheimlich body in the precise sense that it is both at home in and an alien to the larger body in which it is located. Anzaldúa seeks such uncannily alien bodies in seemingly self-identical cultures, histories or organisms to show how these bodies are linked to similar ones (or, perhaps, exist in simultaneity, ‘at the same time’ (Anzaldúa 1987: 77), as equally alien bodies) in other cultures, histories, organisms. For her, the existence of these bodies demonstrates the hybridity of ostensibly separate entities. In Anzaldúa’s metaphysical scheme, this ‘queer of me’ functions as an interface, a common ground that has been abjected from coherent iden- tities (of whatever scale) but that nevertheless resonates with other bodies in those identities and between identities, linking – but also undoing – them. In the preface to the 1990 anthology Making Face, Making Soul/Haciendo caras, she calls ‘inter-faces’ ‘the very spaces and places where our multiple-surfaced, colored, racially gendered bodies intersect and interconnect’ (Anzaldúa 1990: xvi). The dictionary tells us that an interface is, first, a border, ‘a surface lying between two portions of matter or space, and forming their common boundary’, such as the ones Anzaldúa theorises throughout her work. It is, second, the ‘place or means’ of ‘interaction, liaison, dialogue’ between separate and separable entities, and, third and most important, an ‘apparatus’ connecting these entities ‘so that they can be operated jointly’ (OED). In Anzaldúa’s ontology, then, metastable bodies and identities are interfaced by that which has been abjected from them, that is, their queer bodies. The ‘queer of me’ as an interface has a double function. It is the site of connection, dialogue and operation between bodies, but also the promise of their mutual undoing – which is to say, their becoming. In other words, Anzaldúa locates in the queer interface the promise of becoming, of an evolutionary change through the hybridisation that the new mestiza embodies. This ‘bridging’ of entities, their hybridisation, enables an evolutionary de-formation of current existence and a becoming- other of what is presently available. The new mestiza is an entity where queer hybridity functions other than through the processes of dis- avowal and rejection. She constitutes an ongoing hybridisation and becoming in-between cohering entities. In this becoming Anzaldúa locates mestiza strength, characterised by a susceptibility to future con- ditions, to becoming. Clearly, on this ontological level, Anzaldúa’s reading of queerness is radically ahistoricist, ignoring all the allegedly Foucaultian lessons that other contemporaneous discussions of homosexuality cite: Being the supreme crossers of cultures, homosexuals have strong bonds with the queer white, Black, Asian, Native American, Latino, and with the queer in Italy, Australia and the rest of the planet. We come from all colors, all classes, all races, all time periods. Our role is to link people with each other – the Black with Jews with Indians with Asians with whites with extraterres- tials. It is to transfer ideas and information from one culture to another. [. . .] The mestizo and the queer exist at this time and point on the evolutionary continuum for a purpose. We are a blending that proves that all blood is intri- cately woven together, and that we are spawned out of similar souls. (Anzaldúa 1987: 84–5) Queerness here is not primarily a cultural category but names an ontol- ogy of connectedness between and a crossing of temporalities and cul- tures. In the relentless historicising of social sciences and the humanities, Anzaldúa’s new mestiza draws an alien, metaphysical figure. She is a queer hybrid, ‘a product of crossbreeding’ (Anzaldúa 1987: 81) in a monistic universe ‘where all phenomena are interrelated and imbued with spirit’ (Anzaldúa 1987: 66). Anzaldúa suggests we understand all locally sculpted forms and situationally formulated names as evolution- ary expressions of spirit. The call for the recognition and utilisation of the fleeting overlaps and momentary alignments between seemingly discrete identity categories is a familiar one, having been deployed by politically minded minority writers and scholars for decades. Kobena Mercer notes in 1989 that ‘the essentialist rhetoric of categorical identity politics threatens to erase the connectedness of our different struggles’ (Mercer 1994: 218). An acknowledgement and strategic deployment of such connectedness allows one to forge and improvise alliances beyond existing boundaries. As Cathy Cohen writes, ‘it is the multiplicity and interconnectedness of our identities that provide the most promising avenue for the destabi- lization and radical politicalization of these same categories’ (Cohen 2005: 45). Anzaldúa’s texts are frequently cited as examples of the neces- sity and difficulty of such projects of alliance-making. Yet, what is less often emphasised is that for Anzaldúa the political call for forging alliances that exceed our identity categories is indistinguishable from an ontological description of the world. In Shane Phelan’s estimation, Borderlands/La Frontera provides us ‘a sorely needed ontological account of coalitional identity politics’ (Phelan 1994: 58). In this ontol- ogy, ‘the queer of me’ – which the new mestiza consciousness de-abjects, de-disavows – is the elusive potential for actualised, possibly politicised connectedness across and between discrete bodies and identities. Returning is being but only the being of becoming.?Gilles Deleuze, Difference and Repetition [T]he past can be as malleable as the present.?Gloria Anzaldúa, ‘Haciendo caras, una entrada’ In the scene of a girl child’s untimely menstruation that Anzaldúa recounts in both Borderlands/La Frontera (Anzaldúa 1987: 42–3) and the earlier essay ‘La Prieta’ (Anzaldúa 1983: 199), bleeding marks the acknowledgement of both queerness and, because of this crossing, inter- connectedness in the narrator’s personal history. With her premature haemorrhage at the age of three months the child experiences an alien- ation from the home, becomes unheimlich: ‘The bleeding distanced her from others’ (Anzaldúa 1987: 43), Anzaldúa writes in the third person, suggesting the trauma of the event (see Anzaldúa 2000: 223).7 As a doctor pronounces her a throwback to the Eskimo, she turns into, or is revealed as, a queer body, the queer of me, that, as she writes later, inhab- its distinct cultures and races, linking them. ‘The whole time growing up I felt that I was not of this earth. An alien from another planet – I’d been dropped on my mother’s lap’ (Anzaldúa 1983: 199); ‘I was afraid it was in plain sight for all to see. The secret I tried to conceal was that I was not normal, that I was not like the others. I felt alien. I knew I was alien. I was the mutant stoned out of the herd, something deformed with evil inside’ (Anzaldúa 1987: 42–3). Queerness, like bordering, is for Anzaldúa a site of bleeding: simulta- neously a painful breaching of an individual’s bodily integrity and a con- stitutive condition of mutual infiltration or contamination between distinct bodies and speeds, between an organism and the environment. People bleed, as do cultures, ceaselessly extending beyond themselves: ‘The US-Mexican border es una herida abierta where the Third World grates against the first and bleeds. And before a scab forms it hemor- rhages again, the lifeblood of two worlds merging to form a third country – a border culture’ (Anzaldúa 1987: 3). At the site of violence, cultures blend into and discolour each other. That which painfully sepa- rates also precipitates bleeding, and bleeding joins, amalgamates, hybridises. Bleeding names not only the violence of colonial encounters but also an ontology where blood signals as much a violation as an inter- relatedness (‘all blood is intricately woven together’ (Anzaldúa 1987: 85)) and, because of this connectedness, a becoming and change, life’s fecundity. The sanguine terminology suggests that, given the current tendencies in her reception, Anzaldúa’s work may be more productively situated in the varied contexts of post-colonial thinking than the contemporary queer canon, a recontextualisation that would render our perspective more hospitable to metaphysical reflection. Post-colonial theory has remained more susceptible to the thought of ontology than queer theory, perhaps because, from the start, its global, cross-cultural agenda has attuned its theorists and practitioners to the utility and necessity of wide- reaching models. Similarly, the influence of Deleuze’s philosophy on a variety of post-colonial writers (see Hallward 2001)8 goes a long way in explaining their fluency in the metaphysical idiom. For example, both Anzaldúa and Glissant set out from a system of being based on some- thing like a monistic substance, whether it be Anzaldúa’s spirit or Glissant’s tout-monde. While Glissant writes, in Faulkner, Mississippi, that theories of being often provide a refuge from the instabilities of becoming that are actualised at sites of crossbreeding (Glissant 2000: 78), his own metaphysical system echoes Deleuze’s in prioritising becom- ing. Similarly, for Anzaldúa, being is the relentless, if painful, becoming of an interrelated universe. With her ontological claims, Anzaldúa continues a long tradition of transatlantic thinkers for whom blood and bleeding articulate a suitably militant political, ethical and metaphysical stance. One of the earliest examples in this tradition is the African-American writer and activist Pauline Elizabeth Hopkins’s mobilisation of blood as a trope of the nation’s (unacknowledged) hybridity. As the biblical title of one of her serialised novels has it, she insists on the fact of humankind’s being ‘of one blood’. In her lesser-known, self-published tract A Primer of Facts Pertaining to the Early Greatness of the African Race and the Possibility of Restoration by its Descendants – with Epilogue (1905), her repetitive mantra ‘blood will flow’ suggests the irreversible hybridisation of the world, its violence and fecundity.9 Ultimately, for Hopkins blood’s flow does not originate with diasporic violence, on the slave plantation. Rather, it signals an irreducible, originary mixing, a metaphysics of inter- connectedness – the condition of humanity’s being ‘of one blood’. Similarly, for Anzaldúa, blood’s flow may be accelerated at sites of colo- nial violence, but it goes on with or without such moments of explicit, induced crises: ‘All, including the planet and every species’, she writes, ‘are caught between cultures and bleed-throughs among different worlds’ (Anzaldúa 2002: 541; see also Anzaldúa 2000: 21). Anzaldúa differs from Hopkins in that she is speaking not only of the flow of human blood; she describes, rather, cosmic ‘bleed-throughs’, forms of in-, non- or ahuman connectedness. If blood in evolutionary thinking is used as shorthand to denote genealogy, Anzaldúa’s expansion of relatedness beyond the human realm also requires that in reconsider- ing our models of reproduction, continuity and becoming we go beyond kinship theories. Ontological mestizaje does not take place through ver- tical reproduction; the new mestiza is not a branch off the family tree, however twisted. We entirely miss the specificity of her condition if we approach it, as some critics have done, through the structuralist frame- work of regulated sexual exchanges and kinship dynamics (Jagose 1994: 152). Rather, ontological mestizaje proceeds through what might be called horizontal, nonfiliative expansion, through abject(ed) queer bodies. In this way, like Glissant’s understanding of creolisation, Anzaldúa’s metaphysics goes beyond what we most immediately understand by blood’s mobility. In one of her interviews, Anzaldúa comments that, with the new mestiza, ‘[she] was trying to get away from just thinking in terms of blood – you know, the mestiza as being of mixed blood’ (Anzaldúa 2000: 133). If the new mestiza’s hybridity is not reducible to the crossing of genealogical lines, hers is, in Glissant’s terms, an ‘inextricab[ility]’ rather than a ‘mixture’ (Glissant 2000: 84). Anzaldúa’s thinking of life’s interconnectedness in spirit brings her system close to Deleuze’s reading of Spinoza’s single substance. According to Deleuze, in Spinoza’s view bodies are composites: ‘There are no existing bodies, within Extension, that are not composed of a very great number of simple bodies’ (Deleuze 1992: 201).10 Modes can be seen as coagulations in a field of the single substance, held together by the internal relations peculiar to them. Some bodies that contribute to these singular relations are shared with other modes, in which these parts enter into different relations. Because of these shared bodies – Anzaldúa’s ‘the queer of me’ – modes do not form self-enclosed, sovereign or completely separable entities but overlap with other modes, sharing some of their parts, which each mode submits to a unique relation with other parts. Distinct from one another in their specific internal relations, they are con- nected through the parts they share (and, ultimately, the single substance of which they are expressions). As Elspeth Probyn notes, Deleuze’s ‘ideas about bodies shake up assumptions about their boundedness – what we take to be our own and how one body relates to others’ (Probyn 2005: 141). In this context, we must reconfigure relatedness, hybridity and change otherwise than through evolutionary theory’s arborescent schema, as Deleuze and Guattari have called it. To contrast Deleuze and Guattari’s model of rhizomatic relatedness to that of the genealogical tree is to ‘oppose epidemic to filiation, contagion to heredity, peopling by conta- gion to sexual reproduction, sexual production’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1987: 241). Becoming in this model proceeds not through lines of descent but through ‘transversal’ leaps and connections (Deleuze and Guattari 1987: 11; Ansell Pearson 1999: 170), which can be understood as the movement between bodies that, for Anzaldúa, the ‘queer of me’ allows. Hybrid forms of life – which, according to Deleuze’s reading of Spinoza, all modes are – proliferate not through reproduction but by ‘expansion, propagation, occupation, contagion, peopling’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1987: 239). Seen in this way, for Deleuze and Guattari as well as for Anzaldúa, hybridity is the ontological condition of all beings, whose lines of flight habit-formation, often happily, prevents. While the ontological violence of bleeding is particularly acute on la frontera, its irreducibility to (what Mary Louise Pratt (1991) calls) colonial contact zones becomes obvious in the scene of the infant girl’s menstruation. According to the doctor’s assessment (which, notably, the narrator does not dispute), in bleeding the unheimlich queer becomes ‘a throwback to the Eskimo’, a mixed, untimely body. Her queerness is an involutionary (re)turn to a different evolutionary moment. Albeit a sign of interconnectedness, bleeding also precipitates the girl child’s abjection: in her becoming-queer, she feels that she is ‘stoned out of the herd’ (Anzaldúa 1987: 43). Bleeding signals a cosmic interconnectedness, which is lived as an experience of singularity and isolation, one’s being wrenched out of joint with the environment and its horology. If bleeding marks the girl child’s maladaptation, her monstrosity is one of an involutionary untimeliness. When the mestiza emerges as a throwback, her peculiar facultad is similarly characterised by a temporal hybridity in that, with her coming-to-awareness, ‘dormant areas of consciousness are being activated, awakened’ (Anzaldúa 1987: Preface n.p.). Like for nineteenth-century sexologists, queerness for Anzaldúa dis- turbs the progression of time. Her theory of shared bodies and evolu- tionary leaps suggests that sexologists and racial scientists were not wrong in declaring the homosexual woman an irregularity in the evolu- tionary progression, an aberration in linear time.11 Yet, for Anzaldúa queerness does not threaten the evolutionary trajectory with degenera- tion – or rather, she re-evaluates our notions of (de)generation. She seems to understand queer hybridity as involutionary, that is, as a productive detour through the past. As a temporal process, involution in biology and physiology signals a movement inwards or back in time and bears con- notations of aging and degeneration, a ‘retrograde process of develop- ment’, the very ‘opposite of evolution’. As the Oxford English Dictionary tells us, it refers to an organ’s becoming redundant ‘when its permanent or temporary purpose has been fulfilled’. Conceived in terms of pur- poseful existence, an involute organ can be seen only as a leftover without an effective role in the evolutionary present. Yet, much like Bergson and Deleuze, Anzaldúa re-evaluates such schemas by problema- tising the usual evolutionary thinking about time, where the past is that which is less differentiated than the present. As Ansell Pearson writes, ‘evolution is not only a movement forward but equally a deviation and a turning back’ (Ansell Pearson 1999: 46). The primary denotation of ‘involution’ is that of an implication, envel- opment or enfolding. In biological and physiological terms, involution signals an intricate implication of organisms with their environment as well as other individuals, whether past, extant or emergent: in the Oxford English Dictionary’s ‘quasi-concrete’ illustration, it refers to the existing organism’s role as a host or carrier of emergent individuals – ‘the future animal exists in the female parent’ – or the germinal co-infiltration of ‘the universal in the individual’. As such, involution evokes the figure of the fold, with which Deleuze articulates ‘an antiextensional concept of the multiple’ (Badiou 1994: 52). Deleuze’s, then, is an involutionary ontology, where ‘what always matters is folding, unfolding, refolding’ (Deleuze 1999: 137). It is in this sense that involution, as a return, ‘is being, but only the being of becoming’ (Deleuze 1994: 41). Bergson, too, proposes an involutionary understanding of evolution when, in Creative Evolution, he insists on the metaphysical connectedness of all beings: ‘we shall find [the individual] solidary with each of [his remotest ancestors], solidary with that little mass of protoplasmic jelly which is probably at the root of the genealogical tree of life. Being, to a certain extent, one with this primitive ancestor, he is also solidary with all that descends from the ancestor in divergent directions. In this sense each individual may be said to remain united with the totality of living beings by invisi- ble bonds’ (Bergson 1998: 43). Such involutionary interconnectedness characterises Bergson’s, Deleuze’s and – as I have been arguing – Anzaldúa’s ontology, their understanding of becoming. Deleuze and Guattari speak of life’s invo- lutionary turning back, its enfolding upon itself as the ontology of its production: ‘Becoming is involution, involution is creative. To regress is to move in the direction of something less differentiated. But to involve is to form a block that runs its own line “between” the terms in play and beneath assignable relations’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1987: 238–9). Instead of following sexologists in seeing queer hybrids as throwbacks to earlier evolutionary stages, Anzaldúa similarly describes them as involutes, as unforeseeable mutations that reconfigure the horizon of possibilities by activating the virtual. According to her, queer hybridity allows ‘some kind of evolutionary step forward’ (Anzaldúa 1987: 81, emphasis added). Alluding to forms of existence yet to-come with inten- tional ambiguity, she avoids repeating sexology’s programmatic social Darwinism while embracing its problematic of queer (un)time(liness). In this, hers resembles Bergson’s argument that evolution, always open and unpredictable, evades all programmes (Bergson 1998: 104–5; Ansell Pearson 2002: 79). Anzaldúa’s thought of the queer’s untimeliness similarly echoes post- colonial theory’s efforts to problematise the normativity of evolution- ary temporality. Colonialism has often established its authority through evolutionary models of time and development. The logic behind terms such as évolué – used in the discourse of French colonialism to denote successfully assimilated, ‘developed’ natives – depends on the social- Darwinist hierarchisation of evolution into a teleological, universal template of progress. An évolué is an individual whose ‘progress’ has been beneficially accelerated and channelled by his willingness to embrace the missionary benevolence of the colonisers and their culture. Négritude writers such as Aimé Césaire and Léopold Sédar Senghor opposed this dynamic by propounding the necessity of the colonial elite to valorise the spirit and history of Africa, to become griots, through ‘a voyage to ancestral sources’ (Senghor 1991: 136). Senghor conceives this return as a movement backward in developmental time, to ‘the Kingdom of Childhood’. For Melvin Dixon, this is Senghor’s ‘master trope’: childhood for Senghor represents ‘that realm of personal past he claims from the prejudices of Europe and baptizes as négritude’ (Dixon 2006: 65–6). Like négritude’s, Anzaldúa’s system is also one of (re)turning, of turning back and away from the extant historical and cultural moment. Yet, the differences between the two philosophies may be considerable. In seeking to accomplish a ‘return to the native land’, négritude thinkers arguably relied on a model of origin and authenticity that subsequent critics have problematised – most notable among them Frantz Fanon, who sought ‘a . . . secularization of the mystique of negritude with Africa as mediator’ (Khanna 2003: 195). If we accept this critique, Anzaldúa’s return, in contrast, is an involution – a (re)turn not as much to the past as the virtual. It is a turn to a nonfiliative connectedness. An evolution- ary monstrosity, the incipient new mestiza, bleeding across timescales, becomes not an évolué but an involuée, one that turns back not to the origin or that which once existed – ‘Africa’ in négritude thought – but to a connectedness whose actualised forms are untimely, yet to-come.12 In its involutionary mode, Anzaldúa’s queer theory ‘refuse[s] to grant . . . the past the status of fixity and givenness. The past is always contingent on what the future makes of it’ (Grosz 2001: 104). Indigo Violet captures something of this in her commentary on Anzaldúa’s theory of ‘the force of relation’: ‘Rather than attempting to re-member a past in search of a sovereign identity limited solely to our communities of origin, we can begin to re-member the past in order to grapple with the interconnectiv- ity of our mutual living in America’ (Violet 2002: 488). In her turn to the virtual past, the new mestiza’s condition is one of becoming – of queer breeding. As the Oxford English Dictionary suggests, this generation is inherent in involution: involution in algebra designates a process of pro- duction, of becoming-more, through self-enfolding; it refers to ‘[t]he multiplication of a quantity into itself any number of times, so as to raise it to any assigned power’, and, consequently, ‘in extended sense, the raising of a quantity to any power, positive, negative, fractional, or imag- inary’. It is this involutionary condition of becoming that characterises Anzaldúa’s queer hybridity. If, for Anzaldúa, becoming is involutionary, a turning back, for Pauline Hopkins, too, the past is revealed as that which may precipitate a future foreclosed by the nation’s disavowal of amalgamation – the abjection of its ‘queer bodies’ (see Tuhkanen 2007). In Borderlands/La Frontera, a recurrent site for such becoming is miktlán, the underground realm of the dead, where the queer mestiza finds herself. Similarly, in Hopkins, the virtual past often has a subterranean existence: we find it as we stumble onto the tunnel that secretly joins the master’s house and the slave quar- ters in Hagar’s Daughter (Hopkins 1901/1902: 215) – carved out by what Robert Young would call ‘colonial desire’ (Young 1996) – and the forgotten, underground civilisation of Telassar in Of One Blood. Valerie Rohy argues that, in her description of the ‘uncanny land’ of Telassar (Hopkins 1902/1903: 590) – or, we might add, the derelict Enson Hall, the slave mansion that, in the postbellum nation, has earned an ‘uncanny reputation’ (Hopkins 1901/1902: 228) – Hopkins anticipates ‘the psy- choanalytic notion of time’ that Freud exemplifies in ‘The Uncanny’. In Hopkins’s work, Rohy writes, ‘the elegant linearity of blood lines and time lines is problematized by their status as lines of text whose figural- ity is inescapable’ (Rohy 2003: 229). While Rohy discerns the entangle- ment of blood (lines) and time (lines) in Hopkins’s work – an intertwining equally characteristic of Anzaldúa’s thinking – these horologies of blood are, precisely, not figural or metaphorical; rather, Hopkins and Anzaldúa elaborate an ontological account of (queer) hybridity and (queer) time. Both Hopkins’s ‘brotherhood of man’ (Hopkins 1902/1903: 713) and Anzaldúa’s new mestizaje reconfigure ‘blood lines’ and ‘time lines’. Particularly in Anzaldúa, instead of blood genealogies, we find queer, nonfiliative breeding; instead of linear, developmental time, there is becoming as an involutive enfolding onto the virtual past. Because of this enfolding, ‘the past can be as malleable as the present’ (Anzaldúa, 1990: xxvii), a malleability that names the potential actualisation of a future to-come. What tangled skeins are the genealogies of slavery!?Harriet Jacobs, Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl I have been suggesting that Anzaldúa’s work may itself be an interface between queer theory and post-colonial thinking. That is, she may provide a way of connecting the two disciplines while at the same time precipitating their becoming in that her work undoes the integrity of both entities.13 Similarly, it should be clear by now that I detect a significant accord – that is, musical harmony or intellectual agreement (see Deleuze 1995: 86, 196 n7) – between Anzaldúa’s and Deleuze’s systems. Granting all differences and incompatibilities, their philosophies, characterised by metaphysical contemplation, nevertheless meet in their inassimilability to most contemporary queer thinking. It is their paradigmatic orienta- tion that accounts for their marginal positions in the queer canon. Yet, their odd, perhaps ‘ “slantwise” position’ – to evoke Foucault (Foucault 1997: 138) – vis-à-vis queer thinking may also precipitate the latter’s reconfiguration.14 In developing an ontological notion of (queer) hybridity, Anzaldúa interfaces not only queer and post-colonial theories but also queer and African-American writers. As Werner Sollors (1999) and Robert Reid- Pharr (1999) have shown, a central concern in nineteenth- and early- twentieth-century black letters – of which Hopkins has here stood as an example – was to insist that the condition of ‘the future American’ was to be one of hybridity, a becoming-mulatto/a.15 According to Reid-Pharr, nineteenth-century African-American writers ‘[were] not particularly concerned to express a Black American specificity but instead [were] about the project of representing a real alternative (the mulatto, the yellow, the altogether deracialized) to increasingly rigid narratives of black/white difference’ (Reid-Pharr 2001: 73; see also Reid-Pharr 1999). He argues that the third decade of the twentieth century – the Harlem Renaissance – subsequently became an era when ‘black intellectuals in concert with white social scientists beg[an] the very difficult cultural and social work of erasing distinction between black and mulatto and rigid- ifying the distinction between the “purely” black and the wholly “white”’ (Reid-Pharr 2001: 46). One might suggest that nineteenth- century black writing comprises unexhausted virtual resources for our efforts to ‘become more future-oriented’, ‘to look toward the future and to find political languages in which it can be discussed’ (Gilroy 2000: 335). In her insistent focus on an unforeseeable future, Anzaldúa clearly contributes to the remarkable tradition of ‘afrofuturist’ thought and imagination, to which Paul Gilroy, toward the end of his book Against Race (2000), points as a site of ‘imagining political culture beyond the color line’.16 A primary way that Anzaldúa engages with the thought of futurity is her evolutionary schema of queer, ontological hybridity. Reid-Pharr is sceptical about hybridity’s alleged potential for disruptions. He queries ‘whether the excitement with which some scholars approach the possi- bilities inherent in the hybrid, the mixed, the impure, and so forth is quite as well deserved as one might imagine. The idea that we are all somehow mixed is a notion with which any group of reasonably intelligent under- graduates will agree. The problem stems from the fact this agreement does little to change the actual conditions of living Americans’ (Reid-Pharr 2001: 60). In his call for a radically future-oriented politics of post- racialism, Gilroy similarly observes: ‘The temporal adjustment that war- rants [a] sharp turn away from African antiquity and toward our planet’s future is a difficult and delicate affair, especially if we recognize the pos- sibility that the contested colonial and imperial past has not entirely released its grip on us’ (Gilory 2000: 335). But in its involutionary mode, this orientation toward the future would not relinquish the past; rather it would reconfigure it in terms of the virtual. Here, Anzaldúa’s ambivalent affirmation of mestizaje,17 like the Deleuzian emphasis on multiplicities, may be an under-investigated resource for both post-colonial and queer theories of becoming. For example, Glissant sees creolisation-as- inextricability as the ‘boundless home’ of ‘multiplicity’, ‘the suspension of identity’ (Glissant 2000: 98). In (what I have tentatively called) Anzaldúa’s monism, too, spirit is always splintered and split. For her, as for Deleuze, ‘[i]nseparable does not mean identical’ (Deleuze 1983: 50). The ‘inextricable’ (Glissant 2000: 84) connectivity of singular bodies, which I have proposed we call queer hybridity, allows the future to emerge as unforeseeable: creolisation entails ‘[an] unpredictability that terrifies those who refuse the very idea, if not the temptation, to mix, flow together, and share’ (Glissant 2000: 30). Both Anzaldúa and Hopkins argue that the future depends on the de- disavowal, the de-abjection of hybridity, whether intrahuman (Hopkins) or beyond-the-human (Anzaldúa). Mestizaje deterritorialises, allows lines of flight from extant (racial) formations. In this, Anzaldúa echoes nineteenth-century African-American writers, who were consistent in pressing the white memory about the ‘tangled skeins’ (Jacobs 1999: 594) that crossed and bound the supposedly separate-but-equal constituents of the nation. As Harriet Jacobs and others knew, these skeins – explo- sively multiplied through the practice of sexual violence on the planta- tion – were radically inadmissible to the proponents of racial and social hygiene. Importantly, however, such binds often also precipitated flight. As much as a ‘skein’ flees across the sky, for many slaves the entangle- ment of blood lines enabled an escape – like the mythical self-alienation of ‘flying slaves’ – as they stole away from bondage by passing as white, their passport written on their suddenly unmarked skin.18 As the likes of Hopkins and Chesnutt repeatedly suggest, in wider terms the irreversibly involved and involuted genealogies that snake beneath the nation’s offi- cial historiography may draw lines of becoming along the subterranean, disavowed tracks of connectedness within and beyond the nation-state’s borders. Echoing and elaborating on this tradition, Anzaldúa considers queer hybridity, which is more often than not lived in abjection and disavowal, as a dangerous line of flight, an opening onto an uncertain, painful becoming.19 In this chapter I want to take some initial steps in that direction by addressing the question of what it means to be an embodied subject, and more specifically a sexual subject, primarily as a matter of theory, but always keeping in mind the implications of that project for the material parameters that mark out which bodies are to matter.1 Given that for any postmodernist analysis the complex issue of sexual subjectivity is always open to question and uncertainty, then to read the problematic, as I intend, through the field of disability, where sexuality has scarcely been theorised at all, is even more troubling. The widespread western uneasi- ness in acknowledging or even recognising erotic desire – an uneasiness that can be seen at play in the attempted effacement of childhood sexu- ality, or in the consignment of older people to a sexual limbo – is most clearly mobilised where the form of embodiment itself contests, either deliberatively or accidentally, the standards of normative corporeality. Whether the body in question has been intentionally transformed as in transsexual surgery or enhanced by body-building drug regimes, or has suffered severe trauma such as amputation or spinal injury, then the attri- butions of sexual desire and practice are likely to invoke discomfort and confusion. Even more disturbing, however, to the point of denial of any sexuality at all, are those modes of embodiment that are both radically anomalous and resistant – either projectively or retrospectively – to nor- mative recuperation. The category of congenital or early onset disability is surely paradigmatic in that its exclusion from the very notion of sexual subjectivity is so underproblematised that it is taken almost as a natural fact. It is not necessary to re-essentialise sexuality, however, in order to contest the exclusionary violence of such a view. One option – which I shall go on to distort in a more productive Deleuzian manner – is to follow the phenomenological path taken by Michel Foucault and Judith Butler which makes clear that what is at stake lies in the performativity of sexuality, not as a potentially pleasurable bonus, but as a core element of self-becoming that infuses all aspects of the materiality of living in the world. As Merleau-Ponty (1963) suggests, sexuality is, quite simply, a modality of existence. That this insight has profound implications for those who are differ- ently embodied, for whom sexuality is both devalued and denied, is beyond question, for it suggests that to silence or strip sexuality of sig- nificance is to damage the very possibility of human becoming. What is at stake is an ethical matter2 that devolves on the necessarily ambiguous nature of sameness and difference that cannot be encompassed by any facile appeal to equality, not least insofar as that concept is fatally com- promised by its implicit reference to a system of values that is both reliant on and hostile to the non-normative. The issue, at heart, concerns the meanings and representations through which an embodied sexuality is constructed as a positive property of the normative subject, yet viewed as deviant, degraded or simply not acknowledged at all in the non- normative subject. Although my ultimate aim is to demonstrate the effi- cacy of a Deleuzian analysis in pursuit of an affirmative – indeed flourishing – account of disability and sexuality, we cannot yet quite forget Foucault. As with most major postconventional theorists, Foucault largely overlooked the significance of disability,3 but it is nec- essary, nonetheless, to start with his work on uncovering the mechanisms in play in the construction and maintenance of the socio-cultural order. Despite some substantial signals of where ‘bodies and pleasures’ might subvert normative stability, Foucault is clearest in setting out the impres- sive array of disciplinary techniques that are aimed at the singular body in all its aspects, but above all in its sexual pleasures (Foucault 1979, 1980). As he shows, far from originating in an instinctual, biological ground, sexuality is always in a state of dynamic process that is neither predetermined nor fully open to intentional possibilities. Instead, sexu- ality is ‘organized by power in its grip on bodies and their materiality, their forces, energies, sensations and pleasures’ (Foucault 1979: 155). And, indeed, within Foucault’s schema, those bodies themselves are equally constructed, and thus open to endless transformation, rather than given entities. Nonetheless his thinking of how those bodies mate- rialise has some curious omissions. What Foucault notoriously fails to address – as Butler’s powerful setting out and take-up of the notion of performativity (1990) makes all too apparent – is the sense in which corporeality as sexed might be differen- tially constituted along the designated lines of male and female morphol- ogy. But that is only the most obvious omission. What, we might ask, of the enactment of other significant, and indeed intersectional, differences, not least that which constitutes the binary between able-bodied and dis- abled? It is not my suggestion that that particular division can ever be as clearly articulated as the one separating male from female – although both conventional distinctions call for a deconstructive analysis – but that there are similar urgent reasons to interrogate the initial occlusion that covers over difference. In short, and with due regard to the dangers of universal- ism, should we not conclude that the phenomenology of disability – with its potential absences, displacements and prosthetic additions to the body – generates its own specific sets of sexual possibilities that may both limit and extend the performativity of self-identity? If the normative stan- dard against which the acceptability of sexual practice is judged is male- dominant, heterosexual intercourse between two adults ideally acting without overt external intervention, then in addition to an extensive range of familiar refusals mobilised by preference, or at least some form of sub- jective decision, there are also certain morphological constraints that quite simply preclude normative compliance. To have more or fewer limbs than the norm, to be unable to hear or see in the same way as the majority, to have a prostheticised body, or to be conjoined,4 are all conditions that nec- essarily disrupt expectations of the ‘proper’ conduct of sexuality. It is not that any one of us – however we are embodied – can entirely fulfil nor- mative demands, and yet some forms of non-compliance evoke not simply disapproval, but feelings of disgust, albeit a disgust that is threaded through with a certain fascination. Why is it that things of which the body is capable and incapable should generate such negative concern? At least part of the reason emerges if the socio-cultural description of sexual normativity is underpinned by a more philosophical analysis. What confers value in the modernist western conception of the sexual subject are those familiar categories that constitute autonomy, that com- prise notions of self-determination, separation and distinction, and cor- poreal wholeness. And those are precisely the categories both that will be contested by a Deleuzian approach, and in which the disabled body is deemed to be lacking. In contradistinction, then, to the example of homosexuality, which may offend against specific social mores around sexuality by failing primarily to perform appropriate models of mas- culinity or femininity, disability touches on a far more entrenched under- standing of what it is to be a subject at all. Given that connotations of dependency and vulnerability – regardless of whether they are operative or not – are understood to be antithetical to the attribution of full sub- jectivity in general, then the anxieties provoked by those qualities are all the more acute when their embodiment appears in a context that is already beset by all manner of putative threats to the autonomous subject. What I mean is that most sexuality is inherently about intercor- poreality, about a potential merging of bodies, wills and intentions, about a transmission of matter, and about an intrinsic vulnerability in which the embodied subject is not only open to the other in an abstract way, but is likely to be in a physical contact that is neither wholly pre- dictable nor decidable. That the subject is never settled or simply present as a sovereign self, but intricately interwoven with the other in a dynamic process of self-becoming, is of course the basis of the phenomenological model of embodiment in a more general sense. But it is in the sexual relation, above all, that Merleau-Ponty’s notion of the reversibility of touch (1968), with its implicit confusion of the boundaries between one body and another, and its potential for contamination, takes on a con- crete materiality.5 It is precisely because of the inherent risk of losing self- control and self-definition that the domain of sexuality is so highly disciplined and regulated, so saturated with performative constraints.6 And where the body of the other is already uncertain and resistant to the demands of normative comportment and expression – as it is paradig- matically in disability – then touch figures a moment of real threat, a troubling of the subject’s illusion of purity and self-sufficiency. The implication is not that the corporeality of people with disabilities is uniquely unstable, vulnerable or interdependent, but rather that the nexus signals overtly what is more easily repressed in those whose embodiment satisfies the normative standards of western modernity. As Henri-Jacques Stiker puts it, disability is ‘the tear in our being’ (1999: 10), a corporeal mode that in the context of sexuality in particular reveals the incompletion and lack of cohesion of the embodied subject. But if the disabled body refuses recuperation to the project of selfsameness – not simply an-other, not like me, but deeply disruptive of the very parame- ters that constitute selfhood – then its fate is to be refused any recogni- tion in terms of sexual subjectivity. The response is not so much punitive, as it is with so many forms of sexual otherness, but more typically takes the form of a silencing that intends a denial, and yet reveals precisely the complicity that it seeks to cover over. As Foucault notes: Silence itself – the things one declines to say or is forbidden to name . . . is less the absolute limit of discourse . . . than an element that functions along- side the things said . . . [silences] are an integral part of the strategies that underlie and permeate discourses. (1979: 27) For Foucault, silence is an element of discursive power, but does it not suggest also a psychic dimension to performativity that he leaves aside? Despite their explanatory power, then, it seems to me that neither the wider phenomenological approach nor the model of exterior govern- mentality is adequate to the theorisation of sexuality. Although Foucault convincingly charts the operations of a transformatory power over and through the body – albeit one that is interiorised by each individual – he fails to take on the psychic significances of irreducible differences in embodiment. Similarly, despite developing elsewhere a sophisticated understanding of the unconscious processes at work in sexuality (Butler 1993), Butler’s account of performativity per se, though non-volitional, remains a largely surface event. My point is that if body image – and especially internalised body image – is never simply a material reality but a complex and fluid mix of corporeal, psychic and social components, then there is need for a more nuanced understanding, not simply of the operation of normative con- structions of sexuality, but of the reasons for their emergence. In my attempts to theorise the question of disability and sexuality around such a problematic, I initially moved towards an analytic derived from psy- choanalysis, particularly as deployed postconventionally. Despite its effi- cacy in uncovering the roots of the normative anxiety that grips that troubling conjunction, however, the paradigm seems to provide no way of unsettling a cultural imaginary that is closed to a more positive model of corporeally anomalous sexual relationality. In other words, psycho- analysis critiques but does not fully queer the parameters of what is to count and what is to be occluded. Like women’s sexuality, or more spe- cific categories like lesbian desire, that have suffered a certain erasure in which the unsaid indicates an unthinkable anxiety, the conjunction of disability and sexuality is referred back to an explanatory model that implicitly privileges active phallic desire and the illusory quest for the restoration of an originary corporeal unity. I am not claiming that either the psychic or performative operations of gender and disability are directly comparable, but that both pose the question of whether any model based on the normative performance of male-dominant forms of genital sexuality has the capacity to encompass its excluded others. Having explored the seductive lure of the psychoanalytic approach and its inherent shortcomings more fully elsewhere (2007), I will pass swiftly over that trajectory here and move on to open up an alternative that retains a sense of psychic underpinnings, but owes more to Deleuze and Guattari than to Freud or Lacan. As I understand it, the psychoanalytic model, which offers an expla- nation of the mechanisms by which the emerging subject moves from infantile to adult sexuality and is recognised as a sexual being, gives no real consideration to what difference morphological diversity would make. Aside from the supposedly inescapable biological sex of male or female organised around the materiality of the penis, other differences play minimal part in the relevant theory. For both Freud and Lacan the acquisition and stabilisation of self-image is dependent on a certain cor- poreal introjection, not directly of the infant’s own bodily boundaries and sensations, but of an ideal body image representing, as Elizabeth Grosz puts it, ‘a map of the body’s surface and a reflection of the image of the other’s body’ (1994: 38). In place of the maternal-infant dyad, the infant experiences a split which mobilises an endlessly substituted desire for that irrecoverable originary but undifferentiated wholeness. But if, as Lacan implies, the putative unity of the self relies on the reflective unity of the specular other – indeed on jubilantly casting aside the infant’s actual ‘motor incapacity and nursling dependency’ (1977: 2) – then sub- sequently would not that new-found sense of self be radically shaken by any mark of dis-unity in the external image? The disabled body, then, could be read as both insufficient as an object of desire, and an unwel- come intimation of the corps morcelé that the emergent subject must disavow or abject. It is not that the disabled infant would fail to negoti- ate the mirror stage – for in the psychic register all self-identity is based on mis-recognition. Rather, in its apparent lack of wholeness, the infant becomes other, its self-positioning as a subject of desire – like that of women – denied recognition. In such an account, the potential of differ- ence to queer the terms of reference is effectively closed down. To escape the Lacanian impasse, perhaps it is necessary to look elsewhere, and turn to a DeleuzoGuattarian alternative. In decisively rejecting the Freudian/Lacanian model of desire as rep- resentative of, and mobilised by, lack, and by an implicit and impossi- ble promise of completion and unity in a return to the mother, Deleuze and Guattari (1984, 1987) rewrite desire as productive, excessive to the embodied self, and unfixed. Rather than being goal-driven and singu- lar, sexuality becomes, then, a network of flows, energies and capaci- ties that are always open to transformation, and so cannot be determined in advance. Where for Lacan, the corps morcélé of early infancy – and arguably the persistence of that body as a figure of dis- ability – is seen as that which must be covered over in order to bring into being the unified self who will become a sexed and gendered subject in the Symbolic, Deleuze and Guattari celebrate precisely cor- poreal dis-organisation. The fragmented body is reconceived as the body-without-organs, the body in a process of corporeal becoming, that mobilises desire as a fluid indeterminacy that has no fixed aim or object, and which could always be otherwise. Instead of figuring the conventional ideal of autonomous action, separation and distinction, Deleuzian embodiment persists only through the capacity to make con- nections, both organic and inorganic, and to enter into new assem- blages – which in turn are disassembled. Clearly the meaning of the body-without-organs is not intended as a denial of corporeality as such, but is rather a way of rewriting it that avoids the Lacanian narrative of a move from fragmentation to – at very least the illusion of – a tempo- rally and spatially stable unity that grounds the subject. It is, then, the normative organisation of the body that is at stake here, an organism and organisation that closes down and fixes its possibilities rather than operating as ‘a body populated by multiplicities’ (1984: 30). What Deleuze and Guattari want to promote is not a return to the staging of the pre-subjectival infant body, but a deconstruction, a queering, of all bodies that entails both ‘taking apart egos and their presuppositions’ and ‘liberating the prepersonal singularities they enclose and repress’ (1984: 362). To think specifically of the disabled body in this context is not to single it out as different, still less as inadequate. Rather it is a material site of possibility where de-formations, ‘missing’ parts and prostheses are enablers of new channels of desiring production unconstrained by pre- determined – or at least normative – organisation. Although the risk of stalling around an assumption of lack is always present, as it is with any body, the anomalous nature of disability holds out the promise of an immanent desire that embraces the strange and opens up to new linkages and provisional incorporations. As Katherine Ott (2002) points out, the term ‘prosthesis’ has acquired rich abstract meaning in both psycho- analysis and cultural studies as a metaphor signalling some kind of medi- ation between an artificial device and the supposedly natural body, but it has also a complex material history mapping the literal interface between flesh and machine. I use the term in both senses, but want to stress the way in which people with disabilities may materialise some of the issues that underlie my concern with the performativity of the sexual self. On the one hand, prosthetic devices are intended to replace or enhance nor- mative function and appearance, figuring, in other words, a Foucauldian sense of the technological disciplining and regulation of the body, but on the other, their use may be radically subverted.7 The intercorporeality – or rather the concorporeality – of the organic and inorganic, the assem- bly and disassembly of surprising connections, the capacity to innovate, and the productive troubling of intentionality are all experienced by dis- abled people who are prepared to explore the uncharted potential of prostheses. As with other minoritarian thought and practices, like the feminine, the breaking through of the expected limits and constraints of the resources to hand can both intensify the decomposition of binaries – body/machine; active/passive; biology/technology; interior/exterior – and multiply non-repressive forms of passionate vitality. As Deleuze and Guattari note: ‘[d]esire constantly couples continuous flows and partial objects that are by nature fragmentary and fragmented. Desire causes the current to flow’ (1984: 5). Interestingly, this freeing up of desire, both in its object and its aim, may remind us not of the Lacanian infant who after all greets its mirror stage escape from disorganisation with – as Lacan puts it – ‘jubilation’, but of the polymorphous perversity of the Freudian infant, who finds undifferentiated sexual pleasure not only in every aspect of its own body, but in a variety of external objects.8 As Freud points out, such perver- sity in the trajectory of desire persists in adulthood even in such every- day practices as kissing (insofar as it has no genital aim), but for the most part, it must be abandoned – repressed that is – not for the sake of psychic health, but in the interests of socio-political organisation. Nonetheless, despite the potentially productive tension that is set up by Freud’s recognition that the price of such repression is neurosis (1962: 104), his reluctant turn away from polymorphous perversity shuts down precisely the queer reading of desire that Deleuze and Guattari are to reopen. It is sometimes tempting to think of Freud as the first – albeit thwarted – queer theorist, but Elizabeth Grosz, in her own turn to a Deleuzian analytic, offers a less charitable view of polymorphous per- versity. She warns against ‘adopting the psychoanalytic position, which takes erotogenic zones as nostalgic reminiscences of a preoedipal, infan- tile bodily organization’ or ‘seeing the multiplicity of libidinal sites in terms of regression’ (1995: 199). And it is precisely in the refusal to see alternative sexual pleasures as regressive that Foucault prefigures the queering of desire that is associated with Deleuze. Foucault’s interest is both in what bodies can do, in how they are productive, rather than in how they respond to unconscious impulses, and in how the erotic can be redistributed to non-genital sites. In regard to S/M practice, for example, he is adamant that, ‘[t]hese practices are insisting that we can produce pleasure with very odd things, very strange parts of our bodies, in very unusual situations, and so on’ (Halperin 1996: 320 quoting Foucault). People with disabilities who wish to assert an active sexual- ity might well find resonances in Foucault’s words, not because they would necessarily identify with the celebration of fetishism as such, but because the dis-unified or prosthetic body demands a degree of innova- tion and inventiveness that most of us rarely experience. For Deleuze and Guattari, that sexual creativity is surely at the heart of their anti- Oedipal project. The conventional psychoanalytic approach that supports the norma- tive post-Enlightenment paradigm of a closed and invulnerable subject whose sexuality is organised around the presence or absence of the phallus, and whose sexual aim is to replace lack with plenitude, is sup- planted, then, by a model whose potential positivity is unconstrained. In place of prohibition, repression and disavowal, Deleuzian desire is expansive, fluid and connective, grounding sexuality itself as highly plastic and as no longer reliant on the terms of any binary opposition such as those of male/female, active/passive or human/animal. And because the emphasis shifts from the integrity of the whole organism to focus instead on the material and momentary event of the coming together of disparate parts, bodies need no longer be thought of as either whole or broken, able-bodied or disabled, but simply in a process of becoming through the unmapped circulation of desire. At the same time, desire itself takes on a wider meaning that liberates it not simply from the bounds of genital sexuality per se, but more generally from the restricted parameters of what is usually defined as sexual relationality, whether that is accepting of, or challenging to, the conventions. Skin on skin in the bedroom is no more privileged than the sensation of fine sand running through my toes, or the sweet taste of a juicy peach on my tongue. In an essay that is explicitly concerned to rethink lesbian desire, but which might equally open up the arena to the erotics of dis- ability, Elizabeth Grosz takes her cue from Deleuze and Guattari. She writes: there is not, as psychoanalysis suggests, a predesignated erotogenic zone, a site always ready and able to function as erotic: rather, the coming together of two surfaces produces a trading that imbues eros or libido to both of them, making bits of bodies, its parts or particular surfaces throb, intensify, for their own sake and not for the benefit of the entity or organism as a whole. They come to have a life of their own, functioning according to their own rhythms, intensities, pulsations, movements. Their value is always pro- visional and temporary, ephemeral and fleeting: they may fire the organism, infiltrate other zones and surfaces with their intensity but are unsustainable. (1995: 182) Above all, what mobilises or stalls the rhizomatic proliferations of desire is the extent to which the connective nodules escape organised patterns of operation. Desire is not an element of any singular subject; it is not pregiven; it is neither possessed nor controlled; it represents nothing; and nor does it flow directly from one individual to another. Instead it comes into being through what Deleuze and Guattari (1984) call ‘desiring- machines’, assemblages that cannot be said to exist outside of their link- ages and interconnections, and which may encompass both the animate and inanimate, the organic and the inorganic. A desiring-machine expresses no necessary cohesion, continuity or unity, and nor do its part-objects seek a return to an originary wholeness, or find completion in an absent other.9 What mobilises desire are not the endless substitutes for psychic loss, but the surface energies and intensities that move in and out of multiple conjunctions that belie categorical distinctions and hierarchical organisation. For Deleuze and Guattari, such conjunctions always engage the entire social and environmental field, centring not on the capacities of a unique individual, but on the scope and range of nomadic flows of energy – lines of flight – so that embodiment itself extends beyond the merely human. It is not that there is no distinction to be made between one corporeal element and the next, or indeed between the human and animal, or human and machine, but rather that becoming entails an inherent transgression of boundaries that turns the pleasures – sexual or otherwise – of the embodied person away from dominant notions of human subjectivity. As Tamsin Lorraine puts it: ‘The self, rather than having a perspective upon and apart from the world of temporal becoming, is part of a process of dynamic differen- tiation’ (2000: 185). This is not to deny that the interaction of bodies in time and space continues to produce subject effects, but it is only when those effects begin to coalesce and settle that the familiar sover- eign individual of the post-Enlightenment could be said to appear. The performative repetition of particular patterns and modes of organisa- tion serve to construct an illusion of stability and permanence which is, nevertheless, undermined not only by what Butler (1993) sees as the inherent slow-motion slippage of all reiterative processes, but by the unruliness of the leaky bodies whose fluidity, energies and contingen- cies are engaged in mutual transformations. These are bodies that come together – and break apart – in multifarious ways, always frustrating the anticipated outcome of performativity in consistent sexual identi- ties. And where the stress is on the multiple possibilities of connection rather than on the putative dangers of contiguity and the risk of touch, then anomalous bodies are no longer a source of anxiety, but hold out the promise of productive new becomings.10 The stage is set, then, for a potential reclamation of disability and desire that is a very long way from the medium of an Oedipalised sexu- ality centred on the familial drama of ‘mommy, daddy and me’. Like the female body, the corporeality of disability has widely figured in the western imaginary as disordered and uncontrollable, both seductive and repulsive, as threatening contamination of those who come too close, linked to disease, and so lacking in boundaries as to overwhelm norma- tive subjectivity (Shildrick 2002). The link with sexuality is either dis- avowed or seen as overdetermined and abased, a matter of dangerous encounter that cannot but trouble the stability and self-presence of the unwary subject. That none of this reflects the reality of the lives of people with disabilities, or would be articulated as such, is of little consequence. What matters is the power of the cultural imaginary to effectively exclude – in representative terms at least – a whole category of people from an important element in the socially normative process of self- identity. In contrast, what is offered by Deleuze and Guattari opens up a positive model of productive desire, the take-up of which is limited neither to those who already fulfil certain corporeal criteria, nor to the sedimentation of a characteristically modernist form of autonomous subjectivity. In place of the limits that the ideal of independence imposes on desire, the emphasis is on connectivity and linkage. It is not that people with disabilities are unique in relying on a profound intercon- nectivity, but that where for the normative majority such a need may be covered over in the interests of self-sovereignty, it has come to figure a deficiency that ostensibly devalues those unable to make such choices. The disabled woman who needs an assistant or carer to help her prepare for a sexual encounter – be it in terms of dressing appropriately, negoti- ating toilet facilities or requiring direct physical support to achieve a comfortable sexual position – is not different in kind from other women, but only engaged more overtly in just those networks that Deleuze and Guattari might characterise as desiring production. Similarly, a reliance on prosthetic devices – the linkages between human and machine – would figure not as limitations but as transformative possibilities of becoming other along multiple lines of flight. We should caution, nonetheless, against taking an overly romanticised view of disability in which desire is always able to operate as an unchal- lenged positivity. There are clearly some constraints, some morphologi- cal differences and discontinuities, that continue to impede the flow of energies, particularly if that flow has been mapped in advance. But the model I propose here is not about unrestricted choice, or about a freedom that opens up all and every possibility. Like Butler’s original exposition of performativity (1990), which was widely misunderstood to offer unbounded access to self-stylisation, the notion of desiring production must always be contextualised. The rewriting of performativity as intensely connective, and the slippage of reiteration as a more radical dis- continuity, highlights precisely a lack of control that may exacerbate the frustration of intentionality for some people with disabilities. But rather than offering a route to sexual identity, the model proposes something rather different: a break with the putative emergence of a coherent sexual subject from the practices of embodiment, and a turn to the libidinal intensities which play not across unified and integrated bodies, but at points of connection between disparate surfaces or entities that may or may not be organic. The desire produced in and over the dis-organised body owes little to genital sexuality or the goal of self-completion in sexual satisfaction. As Elizabeth Grosz notes: desire is an actualisation, a series of practices, bringing things together or separating them, making machines, making reality. Desire does not take for itself a particular object whose attainment it requires; rather it aims at nothing above its own proliferation or self-expansion (1994: 165) and elsewhere she characterises the appeal and power of such desire as ‘its capacity to shake up, rearrange, reorganize the body’s forms and sen- sations, to make the subject and body as such dissolve into something else’ (1995: 204–5). It is not that Deleuze and Guattari allow no place for subject effects – ‘you have to keep small rations of subjectivity . . . to enable you to respond to the dominant reality’ (1987: 160) – but that they are unsustainable in fixed form, beyond the temporary or provi- sional. The molar politics of identity and subjectivity are never entirely dismissed, but are constantly confronted and displaced by the molecular politics of flows and intensities. What matters to Deleuze is the transfor- mative potential of the process of becoming. In being excluded from full sexual subjectivity, then, those with disabilities have lost nothing of per- manent value. What this all indicates is that were the western privileging of auto- nomous individuality and integrated identity less rigid, the performativ- ity of (sexual) subjectivity could be radically transformed. Despite its commitment to the productive instabilities of discursive construction, the notion of performativity remains focused on a form of individual agency that might be more radically queered by taking account of the emergence of the self precisely through an erotics of connection. Indeed, Deleuze himself goes further in his deconstruction of the relationship between a willing agent and desire: ‘Far from pre-supposing a subject, desire cannot be attained except at the point where someone is deprived of their power to say “I”’ (Deleuze and Parnet 1987: 89). As more and more theorists are beginning to acknowledge, the corporeality of disability is not that of an other fixed in a binary relation to the normatively embodied self, but is already queer in its contestation of the very separation of self and other.11 The so-easily silenced whisper of a kinship that would be denied – for it unsettles the foundations of western subjectivity – is growing into a roar that marks a new understanding of embodiment which owes much to Deleuze. Having now entered ‘the next century’ of which Foucault (1977) claimed Deleuze as the philosopher, I should like to offer the equally bold speculation that the Deleuzian project will be realised at least in part through the medium of rethinking disability.12 Once again, it is not that disability is a unique case, but only that its forms of embodiment, and its embrace of prosthetic enhancement, seem to overdetermine the fragility and instability of corporeality in general. The postmodernist acknowl- edgement that all bodies – normative and non-normative alike – are in a constant process of construction and transformation, brought about not least through interactions in the spatio-temporal dimensions of the social world, means that all are potentially hybrid, nomadic, machinic assem- blages. Moreover, in the specific differences of its capacities – particularly with regard to its libidinal investments – the disabled body exposes the queerness of all sexuality. That disability should be perceived as dangerous, and that its erotic capacities should be disavowed, speaks to the threat that it is able to unsettle the normative constraints that attempt to limit adult sexuality to a highly regulated set of impulses that cover over the rhizomatic opera- tion of desiring-machines. For the most part, the libidinal possibilities of surprising, unpredictable, non-respectable, even dangerous conjunctions, which are in principle open to all of us, are kept in check by the rigid and repetitive structures of a normative sexuality that cannot easily counte- nance unauthorised variation or experimentation. To limit the erotic to the law of desire as it operates within the hegemony of the Symbolic is to assent to a system that can give no adequate account of corporeal differ- ence nor of an alternative sexual imaginary, yet to be realised. It is to close down on fluidity, on connection and on intercorporeality, and to impose prohibition or denial on those who are assigned to positions of social mar- ginality. For people outside the mainstream, then, those who are trans- gendered, HIV positive or people with disabilities, the choice may be between an apparent asexuality that comforts normative expectations in its very powerlessness to mount a challenge, or an expression of desire that will be necessarily exploratory and transformative. It is not of course that all disabled people are sexual radicals or have any urgent wish to lib- erate their desire from the constraints of normative thought and practice; as for all members of regulatory societies, it is impossible to stand outside the networks of disciplinary power/knowledge by any simple act of will. Nonetheless, as comparative outsiders, many such minoritarian figures are already engaged in a queer performativity that takes off from the inno- vative and intimate connections that are often a necessary part of life with a disability. I am thinking here both of the many forms of personal assis- tance that are available in the west, and which inevitably entail an embod- ied relationality that goes beyond normative encounters between putatively autonomous selves, and also of the enormous range of pros- thetic devices that already may be incorporated into the experiential field of a person with a disability. For others, it is not so much a matter of describing present practice but of thinking otherwise about the promise of connectivity, and about what would follow from attending not to the being of a subject, but to the becoming and doing that constitutes a pro- visional and contingent subjectivity. The substantive specificity of disabled bodies nonetheless poses some- thing of a conundrum for those willing to deploy a Deleuzian rather than more generalised queer approach to the problematic of bodies that matter. Where queer theory explicitly intervenes in the parameters of social exclusion – and to an extent must always reiterate binary thinking in order to contest it – it readily lends itself to the critique of mainstream socio-cultural values and regulatory norms that people with disabilities engage with. The idea of assimilation is thoroughly rejected, and as Foucault recognised: ‘It is the prospect that gays will create as yet unfore- seen kinds of relationships that many people cannot tolerate’ (1997: 153). As such the lure of identity politics lingers on, bolstered by queer theory’s oppositional take on normativity that has broadened out to include differences in race, ethnicity and potentially embodiment, as well as sex and sexuality. The embrace of multiple and diverse minorities undoubtedly casts the dominant standards in an ambiguous light that troubles the centre, but it also appears to gesture towards the reappear- ance of a stable subject. In contrast, when Deleuze and Guattari refer to minoritarian practices, they are not ontologising any given category as an identity; instead ‘all becoming is a becoming-minoritarian’ (1987: 291). Moreover, their notions of becoming-woman, becoming-animal or becoming-minoritarian are not simply conceptually unattached to the groupings named and open to all, but refer to processes that operate only through the assemblages temporarily brought about by radically dis- parate machinic connections. Where, then, does this leave the substan- tive minorities, like people with disabilities? From a DeleuzoGuattarian perspective, they too must enter into the process of becoming, a process that entails both contesting the relations of power that structure every fixed subject position and leaving behind any existing modes of identifi- cation. It is risky and uncomfortable, but necessary insofar as the dis- abled body, however well adapted or accommodated, is – like the figure of ‘woman’ to whom Deleuze and Guattari consistently refer – always constituted by the repressive organisation of modernist principles. So long as all fixed and unified identities rely on the performative exclusion of an abject domain of the unthinkable (Butler 1993), then certain bodies will never matter. If, on the other hand, our mutual and irreducible connectivity were recognised as quite simply a condition of becoming, and as the ground for the positivity and productive play of desire, then the notions of independent agency and self-containment that mark the normative subject might lose their exclusionary power. In place of the liberal demand for rights, choice and self-determination that presently shape the dominant discourse of disability activism, a more open and productive model that celebrates the qualities of those already living at the margins might be proposed. It is their very dis-organisation, and their necessarily overt contiguities with an array of others, that better enables such figures to breach the boundaries and explore what lies beyond the normative limits. An open-ended and ambiguous yet more positive Deleuzian mode of becoming has significant implications, not only for the hitherto disavowed conjunction of disability and sexuality but for everyone. The point is move away from the notion that desire rep- resents or substitutes for an originary loss that codes all bodies in the same way; instead it maps the multiplicity of becoming. And once the plasticity of the erotic is acknowledged rather than repressed, then the circulation of desire and the partial satisfactions of pleasure would be a matter of differential exploration and experimentation, rather than the site of silence and shame. There are of course dangers – not all lines of flight will soar – but the possibilities of reconstruction and transforma- tion, in sexuality as elsewhere, speak to the hope of personal and social flourishing. That term is deeply unfashionable within postconventional discourse, but it is precisely what I mean. There are two ways to think about the theoretical point of view in modernity. The first is critical. After Kant’s ‘Copernican turn’ we recog- nise that there can be no view from nowhere. To experience or live a world we must be related to that world through knowledge or percep- tion; there cannot, therefore, be any intuition of that which exists outside the relations through which it is received (Langton 1998). All our con- cepts are concepts of some intuited world, and all our intuitions are formed as conceptually meaningful and ordered. Kant therefore defines theoretical knowledge as given through the forming power of concepts and the receptive power of intuition. There can be no theoretical knowl- edge of any supposed foundation or law that would lie beyond experi- ence: to know is to relate to, and conceptualise, what is other than oneself. There cannot be a theory of that which underpins experience; theory is, by definition, always situated, relational and grounded. Theory can, however, reflect on the conditions of our situation, and this would yield practical rather than knowable outcomes. If there can be no law intuitable beyond experience, then we are compelled to give a law to our- selves (O’Neill 1989). We cannot appeal to a foundation or ground, for we are always already grounded. Theory can only tell us that we exist within mediation and experience. Practically, though, this recognition of our location within experience allows for a radical anti-foundationalism. In the absence of any law or ground we must give a law to ourselves, and because this law is ungrounded – because there is no point of position beyond experience – no point of view can claim to speak for the law. One must give a law to oneself. As a consequence liberalism remains a primarily critical and reflective ethic. Even though one is always located, one must strive to imagine a law that could in principle be agreed to be any subject whatso- ever; one must neither make an exception of oneself – say, by not acting in a manner that would be universalisable on the grounds that one knows better – nor can one attribute one’s located preferences to others. One can only will, ethically, that which could be willed as such (Kant 1990). Such a critical recognition of locatedness has served feminism and radical pol- itics well. No one can be excluded from the practice of self-determination; there can be no exclusion from the public sphere of reason on the basis of spurious empirical claims. Thus, Mary Wollstonecraft (1975) argued that there was no way of knowing whether women were less capable than men at the art of reason; there could be no exclusion of women from educa- tion and argument, for if there is such a faculty as reason then it behoves us all to extend that faculty to its highest power. It is precisely the absence of foundations and the impossibility of basing theory on anything other than our situatedness that releases the subject from ‘imposed tutelage’ and issues in the central value of autonomy, of giving a law to oneself (Kant 1990). In addition to Kantian liberal anti-foundationalism the other possi- bility for modern political theory lies in communitarianism. On this model there can be no view from nowhere, but the liberal appeal to the rational self-constituting individual cannot function as a legitimate point of departure. Selves, including the modern ideal of the auto- nomous self-critical subject, are constituted through others. One is a self only through relations; to be a self requires that one establish oneself as recognisable through time, as having this or that character. Such recognition requires others, both so that one might be recognised as who one is now, and also so that there will be a context of norms, traditions, expectations and narratives through which one understands what it is to be human. On this communitarian model, theory does not take the form of abstracting from one’s particularity to produce a purely formal procedure. Theory is not the regulation of those who would seek to exempt themselves from the claims of a universal unfounded reason. Theory is reflection on constituted norms, and is often enabled not by limiting contradiction and particularity, but by paying acute attention to those cultural moments when the conflict of founding (but irrecon- cilable) values are brought to the fore. If autonomy – relying on no law other than the law one can give oneself – is the key value of liberal anti- foundationalism, recognition is the key value of communitarianism. Both values follow from an acknowledgement of the theoretical predicament: that to live or be a self is to have a law, but no such law can be known or intuited. Autonomy asks how one must regulate oneself in the absence of a founding shared law; recognition looks at the ways in which such shared laws are founded communally, histori- cally and culturally. Judith Butler’s work, from its very beginning, has maintained the force of both these founding values of modern theory. On the one hand, the self is not given as a knowable substance but must be performed or given to itself through action. On the other hand, such self-giving or perform- ing is only possible through others and recognition. It is for this reason that Butler’s work is not so much a mobilisation of twentieth-century theory for queer politics, but a theory in which the queer body becomes exemplary. For it is the queer body that exposes the essential tension of autonomy and recognition. One must both be recognised as a subject who subtends various performances, but there must also be a self who is not reducible to performances, such that actions can be posited intelligi- bly as issuing from this or that coherent self-fashioning subject. To be a self requires that one take on a norm; one must be recognisable as this or that subject. The condition of being a self – that one remain the same through time – requires a certain iterability: what one is must be repeat- able or maintained. The various performances or actions that the self undergoes must be recognisable as repetitions of some style or mode of being. Gender is one of the ways in which various differing performances can be recognised as differences of this or that sexual subject; if one’s actions do not bear this iterability then one cannot be recognised as a subject. At the same time as the self exists only in performing itself as a self to be recognised, one must not be reducible to one’s performances alone. If performances are normative, intelligible or readable then one can be recognised as a sexual subject who exists above and beyond any of her recognised actions. The self who asks to be recognised is, in the very claim for recognition, never reducible to the norm or system through which she speaks and performs. Without a difference or deviation in the repetitions of the norm one could not be a subject who subtends or per- forms that norm. Theory, then, maintains the necessary and essential tension between subjection (to the norm) and activation: the norm has its being only through the various performances which also introduce dif- ferences and instabilities. In many respects we might consider Butler’s work to be both exem- plary of the precarious model of the self that is presupposed in cultural studies, as well as being critical of the premises of identity politics. On the one hand, one can be a self only through some recognisable iden- tity; on the other hand, the performance of that identity is also the con- dition for its destabilisation and possible (but not necessarily enabling) undoing. Such a theory at once provides a way to think through the classic problems of representation in cultural studies. How do we judge images of political identity? On the one hand we might argue that stereotypical representations of certain groups in the media reinforce rigid norms, preclude self-constitution and do not allow for subjects outside those norms to be recognised. On the other hand, there can be no creation of oneself ex nihilo. Butler’s answer to the politics of rep- resentation is not to judge between good and bad representations, dividing the authentic from the imposed. Rather, the conditions of rep- resentation themselves will yield a politics in which one can be a self only through the repetition of a norm, at the same time as that very rep- etition is essentially queer. For the queer is not radically outside or beyond recognition and selfhood; it is that which makes a claim to be heard as human – within the norms of speech, gender, the polity and the symbolic – at the same time as it perverts the normative matrix. Perhaps too much has already been said about Butler’s early championing of parody and drag (Bersani 1995), but her work is dominated by the claim that it is the necessary repetition of a norm that both allows a self to be recognised, at the same time as the repetition is also the self’s undoing. To perform as queer is to maintain and demand recognition for that which has, hitherto, exceeded the bounds of cultural recogni- tion. Thus, the queer is that which both partakes in the norm – one can be recognised as male or female – and destabilises that norm, for this male or female will not take on the desires of the heterosexual matrix. Butler’s theory therefore allows for the (albeit problematic) mainte- nance of identity politics; for the assertion of oneself as this or that subject demanding recognition is both necessary for the social system at the same time as it introduces a necessary dynamism of the system. At the same time, identity politics must be recognised as queer: one is not asserting one’s difference from some already recognised other. One is asserting difference as such: that one is a self only insofar as one, through repetition, also creates and performs differently. The condition for iden- tity is difference, but for Butler this is iterative difference. There is not a substance or subject who then goes through time and difference; it is the repetition of this differing act from which one posits a subject. Theory is the recognition of the conditions of performative difference, and through this recognition one enables a recognition of the supposedly stable and conditioning norm as itself conditioned. Against the model of iterative difference which allows for the critical maintenance of identity politics, Gilles Deleuze offers a theory of posi- tive difference. Crucial to the understanding of the distinction between the post-Hegelian iterative model of difference and Deleuze’s under- standing of difference is the status of relations. In her early work on Hegel, Butler explains Hegel’s critique of internal relations: if relations were internal, then the way in which any being related to the world would be determined in advance, so that its encounters, journeys and interactions would merely unfold what that being already is (Butler 1987: 35). Against this, Hegel argues that something is only in its rela- tions; it is not that there are beings – or even a Being – that then encounter difference. Rather, there is difference or relationality from which points of stability and recognition emerge. Absolute consciousness is just this differing – or not being the self-same – recognising itself. It is a relation to relationality, a consciousness aware that it is nothing other than its dis- tance and difference from itself. We might say, then, that we have aban- doned internal relations, for it is not as though any being determines its world or gives a world to itself. Rather, there is the unfolding of relations which allows any particular relation or difference between terms; con- sciousness is just this coming to recognition of oneself as nothing more than relationality. The essence of what something is – that which makes it what it is – is its existence, its actualisation, or the way in which it has established itself as this or that complex of relations. Butler remains committed to the idea that relations are produced through a process of difference and repetition. Something is identifiable as something only if it is repeated through time, but each repetition also introduces a certain difference or not being at one; the self in remaining itself is always subjected to, or negated by, that which is not. Deleuze also insists that relations are external to terms. However, Deleuze does not allow a system or form of differentiation to exhaust the real or the poten- tiality of being. Rather, while relations do not follow from self-sufficient terms, Deleuze posits a positive virtual plane, or ‘pure past’, which is actualised in each encounter to produce both the term which is repeated, and the difference established in each term. Deleuze seeks to find syn- theses of difference and repetition which are asymmetrical, positive and pre-individual. In Difference and Repetition Deleuze makes two key points with regard to the establishment of an active synthesising subject. First, the self who repeats and from whom relations to the world are established is grounded upon passive, pre-individual syntheses: the indi- vidual who acts is composed of a thousand tiny egos, each effected from an encounter. Thus, it is not the self who must receive sensation and organise a world, for sensations are already the effect of intensive encounters or syntheses. And intensity’s synthesis is not the repetition through time of the equal – not the maintenance of this spatial being, or this quality – but is an asymmetrical synthesis in which intensity ‘is’ at each moment of its repetition different from itself. Before there is the ‘I’ of the self who repeats itself actively, there is the ‘eye’ which is already the establishment of a qualitative relation or the unfolding of an inten- sity. The ‘eye’ is the result of a passive synthesis that has organised the problem of light, and light – as intensity – is that which might also have unfolded or been explicated in other relations or other qualities: so that each of our organs, according to Deleuze, is a contemplative soul, not receiving so much determining data, but giving a quality to the intensi- ties of all it encounters: The passive self is not defined simply by receptivity – that is, by means of the capacity to experience sensations – but by virtue of the contractile con- templation which constitutes the organism itself before it constitutes the sensations. [. . .] There is a self wherever a furtive contemplation has been established, wherever a contracting machine capable of drawing a difference from repetition functions somewhere. The self does not undergo modifica- tions, it is itself a modification – this term designating precisely the differ- ence drawn. Finally, one is only what one has: here, being is formed or the passive self is, by having. Every contraction is a presumption, a claim – that is to say, it gives right to an expectation or a right in regard to that which it contracts, and comes undone once its object escapes. (Deleuze 1994: 100) Second, while the self is nothing other than repeated modifications, what is repeated is not the actual, existing, material or bare present – and does not happen to an individual – but is the pure past. Each event is the actu- alisation of a pure potentiality, a power to be which each present repeats. All the objects that constitute an individual’s reality are haunted by another series of virtual objects that are never fully present; these are not psychic, wished for or imagined. A virtual object opens any material objective individual series to a contemplation beyond the self, a pure intensity that is beyond the habitual time of the body, and the remem- bered time of the psyche. The beyond of pleasure – or the individual’s definition through a series of desired objects – is not an indeterminate negativity or undifferentiated ‘beyond’. Deleuze objects to psycho- analysis’ grounding of the ‘beyond’ of pleasure on an opposition between death and life, between the self and its return to a state of inan- imate matter. Instead, Deleuze insists on the pure past as a virtual, eternal, intense, pre-individual and positive series which each actualised present repeats. If the individual appears as so many organised, actual and life-serving objectifications – what I take to be other than myself, and towards which I am directed – this is because the individual is grounded upon a series of virtual objects. These virtual objects are pure fragments, or shreds of the past: a past that was never present and does not exist, but is always absent from itself and insists (Deleuze 1994: 124–5). To give this concrete form, we can note that any actualised, existing, acting, repeating subject – a self who defines itself against (autonomy) and through others (recognition) – has as its prior condition pre- personal series. The aim of Deleuze’s ethics and politics is to analyse, affirm and open these series. Most importantly, in terms of theory and the life and humanity of theory, Deleuze insists on the importance of the ground or dark precursor. Any two series of resonating differences – such as the differences of a language and the differences of our bodily identity – resonate with each other and can experience forced move- ment only through a ‘dark precursor’ or ground. So, in order for the self who says ‘I’ and speaks the language of man to be co-ordinated with the bodily movements of the self-interested, active and organised human organism there has to be some silent, unstated, undecided, passive ground or sense that itself cannot be simply stated. Much of Difference and Repetition is concerned with trying to think those silent presuppositions of representation and identity which tie the series of philosophical concepts – of the self, the ‘I’, truth, identity and recogni- tion – with the body of man oriented toward maintaining a state of equilibrium. For Deleuze, thinking beyond the human requires some forced move- ment which he introduces in Difference and Repetition as the ‘beyond’ of a life and pleasure of self-maintenance: this beyond would be ‘death’, but not a death opposed to life and Eros. Thanatos, he argues, is Eros carried to his ‘nth’ power: desexualised, or rendered purely virtual and inhuman. Only here would we encounter pure intensity. The self or ‘I’ who loves another self (erotically) is already the effect of a whole series of virtual and intersubjective objects. The phallus, for example, is such a virtual object; it organises desires and bodies before their actual and indi- vidual encounters. Deleuze also refers here, and in The Logic of Sense, to the aleatory object which allows series to resonate. So, before ‘I’ can love or recognise ‘you’, our perceptions have already been synthesised in advance by the sense of our encounter: the sense or orientation of what counts as human, what counts as love, what counts as a recognisable body. For Deleuze this virtual plane is precisely not linguistic, for lan- guage as such can only organise bodies after those bodies have been intensively and affectively organised or synthesised. The true aim of thinking or theory would be to go back to those singular points from which relations and affects have been determined: Underneath the large noisy events lie the small events of silence, just as underneath the natural light there are little glimmers of the Idea. Singularity is beyond particular propositions no less than universality is beyond general propositions. Problematic Ideas are not simple essences, but multiplicities or complexes of relations and corresponding singularities. (Deleuze 1994: 203) How does each individual or the self who says ‘I’ repeat and modify a virtual series of affections, encounters and intensities that are not its own and that might also be repeated otherwise? Against iterative difference – which is a repetition of a being that has no existence outside its seriality, or that produces that which repeats only through a maintaining of the same through time – Deleuze insists on the positive insistence of the virtual in all its intensity. If we were to draw an example from genetics we might say that itera- tive difference gives us the idea of an organism that would undergo change and modification through repeating itself; each generation or copy introducing more and more instability and alterity. Deleuze’s posi- tive difference shows how each modification of an individual is preceded by micro-perceptions or encounters: before the self repeats itself there are repetitions of intensities or pure qualities. A virus might be repeated in my body creating not a different organism but a different potentiality – a new virus or the modification of an organ, which might then effect my body’s motility – not the ways in which I act but the ways in which I am acted upon. Difference is not the reiteration of some quality but occurs through the eternal return of the power to create relations, to produce connections. Concretely, this idea of difference does not yield an organ- ism being modified through selection, but an individuation and selection which disregards the organism, creating connections among bodies that is the undoing of any organised body: For the I and the Self are perhaps no more than indices of the species: of humanity as a species with divisions. [. . .] The I is therefore not a species; rather – since it implicitly contains what the species and kinds explicitly develop, in particular the represented becoming of the form – they have a common fate, Eudoxus and Epistemon. Individuation, by contrast, has nothing to do with even the continued process of determining species but, as we shall see, it precedes and renders the latter possible. It involves fields of fluid intensive factors which no more take the form of an I than of a Self. Individuation as such, as it operates beneath all forms, is inseparable from a pure ground that it brings to the surface and trails with it. (Deleuze 1994: 190) In political terms we can also distinguish iterative and positive repetition. For Butler, an individual does not exist ex nihilo but can be a self only through an other which it repeats and modifies. So, for example, claiming to be a queer subject might involve laying claim to certain normative prac- tices – such as marriage and gender – which would have the effect both of normalising the self by subjection to convention and recognition. To a certain extent all politics is queer politics or the negotiation between the degrees of repetition to which the self submits and the amount of devia- tion or difference from normativity the self can effect. The queer is nega- tive, defined as the difference from those conditions of recognition and normativity which both enable and preclude autonomy. Deleuze offers a quite different ontology and ethics of non-being. We are mistaken if we think of non-existence as the failure, deviation or difference from the present and actual. We need to think of non-being as positive, real and affirmative. Each existing, actualised individual is therefore the actualisa- tion of a non-being, which is better defined as ‘?-being’ or as a series of problems. The queer self might be better thought of as a counter- actualisation of the material repetitions that make up ‘man’. We could see marriage in its current bourgeois normative and heterosexual form as the solution to a certain problem or question: how the self forms its gender, manages its desires and property, and organises its child-rearing. But the queer self would repeat the problems that compose the self: counter- actualising the present by drawing on the pure past of the questions from which we have emerged. How might a self desire, what might count as an object of one’s desire, what relations or events might the couplings of bodies produce and enable? Thus, whereas Butler’s model of theory is to begin with the subject and then interrogate its conditions of possibility in the tension between recog- nition and autonomy, Deleuze’s theory is one of positive intuition. Here, we go beyond composed selves and problems to the affects and intensi- ties from which they are organised. For Butler a queer theory is one in which the conditions of being a subject are essentially queer – one must claim to speak as a self, but can do so only through an other who is not oneself. At the same time, the condition for being queer is being a subject: one must be recognised as having a claim to speak, be and exist. For Deleuze, the conditions of theory require a going ‘beyond’ of the self and the organism. As long as we are concerned with identity, with the repe- tition of who we are, we remain within constituted matter and lived time. To think transcendentally we need to think the pure form of time and dif- ference, the pure intensities which each present repeats and actualises both in the present and for all time. For Deleuze, then, the conditions of the queer and the conditions of the new are the same: to counter-actualise the present, to repeat the intensities and encounters that have composed us, but not as they are for us. In quite specific terms this requires a radical and distinct break from identity politics. As long as ethics is defined as the maintenance of indi- viduals as they are we restrict the potentiality of life to one of its consti- tuted forms. Only by thinking intensities beyond the human can we begin to live ethically. Thus queer politics would involve neither recognition of the self, nor a refusal of normativity, but the affirmation of the pre- personal. Rather than assessing political problems according to their meaning and convention – or the relations that organise certain affects and desires – we need to think desires according to virtual series, all the encounters that are potential or not yet actualised. Such a queer politics has two direct consequences. First, practically, once we abandon conditions of recognition we can interrogate a practice according to the potentiality of its encounters. Rather than seeing gay marriage, trans-gendering or gay parenting as compromised manoeuvres in which the queer self repeats and distorts given norms, we need to look at the positivity of each encounter. How do bodies establish relations in each case, and what powers are opened (or closed) to further encounters and modifications? Second, aesthetically, against an art of parody or drag that would repeat the norm in order to de-stabilise it from within, posi- tive repetition and difference make a claim for thinking time in its pure state, those powers to differ which are pure fragments. Art would not be the representation or formation of identities but the attempt to present pure intensities in matter, allowing matter to stand alone or be liberated from its habitual and human series of recognition. The sensations pre- sented in art are not those of the lived subject but are powers to be lived for all time, allowing us to think the power of perception beyond the selves we already are. This aesthetics would, in turn, give us a new distinct model of reading. On the critical identity-based model of queer theory, where the queer self is the de-stabilising repetition of an enabling normativity, we look at the ways in which works of art introduce a difference or dissimulation in the image of the human. One reading of Shakespeare’s A Midsummer Night’s Dream, for example, might focus on the ways in which the final image of normative heterosexual desire has to go through a certain detour or deviation in order to arrive at is supposed destined end. Queer reading would attend to all those moments in the text in which the normal is achieved, produced, effected and also, therefore, exposed as contingent, constituted and open to change. To a great extent the queer theory indus- try has been mobilised around a re-reading of the canon’s images of het- erosexual desire to show moments of instability, deviation and mobility. Deleuze, however, offers a quite distinct model of reading, both of the literary work in Difference and Repetition, and of art in general in The Logic of Sensation and (with Guattari) in What is Philosophy? In The Logic of Sensation (2003) Deleuze describes all art as the repetition of the history of art, but always with a struggle to release sensations from their subjection to figuration and repetition. There is no such thing as a bare canvas, for we are already composed and dominated by clichés. The future can come, not through the assertion of greater and greater indi- viduality, but only in a destruction of the personal to release the figure. This would not be the figuration of some repeatable form, but the delineation or process of differing from which this or that determined figure is drawn. In Difference and Repetition Deleuze draws upon Shakespeare’s Hamlet and Proust’s Remembrance of Things Past to describe the profound syntheses of time that go beyond the body that is composed of habits, and the self that is composed of memories. The act in Hamlet exists above and beyond Hamlet’s individual existence; it is a pure potentiality, something that he may or may not live up to, actualise or bring into the present. The future, or the opening of the new, can come about not through Hamlet drawing upon himself, his desires or his per- sonal past, but by living out or allowing that power to differ which exists above and beyond him: As for the third time in which the future appears, this signifies that the event and the act possess a secret coherence which excludes that of the self; that they turn back against the self which has become their equal and smash it to pieces, as though the bearer of the new world were carried away and dis- persed by the shock of the multiplicity to which it gives birth: what the self has become unequal to is the unequal in itself. In this manner, the I which is fractured according to the order of time and the Self which is divided accord- ing to the temporal series correspond and find a common descendant in the man without qualities, without self or I, the ‘plebeian’ guardian of a secret, the already-Overman whose scattered members gravitate around the sublime image. (Deleuze 1994: 112) Here, for Deleuze, the art of theatre is not about the representation of plots, individuals and desires, but somehow giving form to a power of the pure past. Beyond the habitual repetitions which organise a body – ‘this is what I do’ – and beyond the repetitions that constitute a self – ‘I am who I am by being the same through time’ – drama exposes this higher repetition which destroys the self and its world of co-ordinated actions: ‘Drama has but a single form involving all three repetitions’ (Deleuze 1994: 115). The task of art is the presentation of this higher power, and reading the work of art is intuiting this power of time. In Proust the art of the novelist lies in presenting a self with its habits and recollections, and then presenting the pure potentiality from which that self was actualised: the past not as it was actually lived and recalled, but as it never was, but only could be, ‘in a splendour which was never lived, like a pure past which finally reveals its double irreducibility to the two presents which it telescopes together: the present that it was, but also the present which it could be’ (Deleuze 1994: 107). Against a critical reading, which would look at the ways in which art or literature queers the pitch of the normal, Deleuze offers a positive reading in which temporality in its pure state can be intuited and given form as queer, as a power to create relations, to make a difference, to repeat a power beyond its actual and already constituted forms. (Barad in press). Instead, the Brittlestar is the model of intra-action, con- stantly breaking off and regenerating its bodily boundaries as it enfolds bits of its environment within itself and expels parts of its own body into the surrounding environment. In this way, the Brittlestar cannot be said to exist as an autonomous entity positioned inside a spacetime frame of ref- erence, neither that of a Euclidean container nor even that of a dynamical manifold specified by classical science. There is no pre-existent container or manifold within which the creature exists and moves along spacetime co-ordinates while its body is made and remade. Instead, the Brittlestar might be said to undergo what I would call a spatio-temporalisation, what Barad refers to as ‘space-time-matter-in the making’ (Olkowski 2007: 33–40; and Barad in press). To truly understand the Brittlestar and its ongoing spatio- temporalisation calls for new ontological and epistemological structures. The pure cogito can only be enacted in the binary sphere where it remains independent of extension. It knows only the content of its immediate thoughts, those that can be intuited clearly and distinctly in the present moment without the aid of memory, sensation or even reason. In order to go beyond this immediacy, it must call upon divine intercession. But even then, it remains committed to the idea of the world in the mind while ignoring or effacing that aspect of the mind that is in the world. Barad argues that knowing is not a human-dependent characteristic but a feature of the world in its differential becoming, that the world articu- lates itself differentially, performing and articulating what matters, whereby different material intra-actions produce different materialisa- tions of the world. Moreover, differentiating is not about othering/ separating, but about making connections and commitments. Thus Brittlestars are not pure bits of nature or blank slates for the imprinting of culture but are engaged in making a difference in a world of continu- ous differential becoming (Barad in press). The implications that can be drawn from the study of the Brittlestar are numerous. But among them are certainly the ideas that nature makes and unmakes itself experimen- tally and that nature’s differentiations of its own material were never binary. In this, Barad’s onto-epistemology strongly resembles that of Gilles Deleuze. Classical physics developed the rules for differentiating complicated functions by starting from the formula for a curve and calculating the formula for the gradient (or steepness) of that curve by taking small dif- ferences in the x and y directions and computing the gradients of the resultant straight lines – the gradient function is called the derivative of the original function (Devlin 1994: 90). ‘The crucial step . . . was to shift attention from the essentially static situation concerning a gradient at a particular point P to the dynamic process of successive approximation of the gradient [of the curve] by gradients of straight lines starting at P’ (Devlin 1994: 87, 88). From this, Deleuze makes ‘a complete determina- tion with regard to the existence and distribution of . . . [regular and sin- gular] points which depends upon a completely different instance’, an instance characterised in terms of a field of vectors (Devlin 1994: 44).1 The goal here is to explicitly link differential equations and vector fields. A vector is an abstract entity that has magnitude and direction in a plane or in three-dimensional space, or in a space of four or more dimensions in vector space, from which may be projected an infinity of possible tra- jectories in spacetime (Devlin 1994: 44).2 A vector field is defined, by Deleuze, as the complete determination of a problem given in terms of the existence, number and distribution of points that are its condition. This corresponds fairly well to the more or less standard mathematical definition where a vector field is defined as associating a vector to every point in the field space. Vector fields are used in physics to model obser- vations, such as the movement of a fluid or the transformations of Brittlestars, which include a direction for each point of the observed space. In mathematics (specifically linear algebra), the rules of associa- tion, commutation and distribution define vector space without reference to magnitude or directions. Thus they may be utilised in a variety of fields whose terms are not material or physical as well as in the material and physical realm.3 The rules governing vector fields, association, commutation and distri- bution are the least restrictive set of linear rules that remain commutative, that is, for binary operations, any order is possible.4 These rules have their equivalents in logic where association is an expression of logical equiva- lence permitting the valid regrouping of simple propositions; it governs the relations, which is to say, the connections between subject and predi- cate (Kant 1965: 108). In syllogistic terms, this would be expressed as the categorical relation.5 Deleuze argues that the rules for vector space apply to nature and so nature itself is associative, commutative and distributive, where mere association – as opposed to unity – means that the laws of nature distribute parts which cannot be totalised, and that nature is con- junctive, expressing itself as this and that, this or that, rather than as Being, One or Whole. The claim is that we can never have knowledge of nature as a whole. Divine power is nothing but nature’s diverse parts (places, species, lands and waters); each self is not identical to any other; and every ‘body’ comprising the world consists of diverse matter. As such, nature is associative, commutative and distributive and our knowledge of nature is derived from understanding these immanent, regulative func- tions. If nature’s immanent, regulative functions are associative, com- mutative and distributive, each of these, as mathematical or logical operations, reflects a view of nature as the power of things to exist one by one without any possibility of them being gathered together in a unity (Deleuze 1990: 266–7). Following these rules, whatever has been added together can be taken apart and reformulated. Thus, becoming is every- where and the claim made for Brittlestars, that they are ‘living breathing mutating lensing systems that transgress the sacrosanct divides between organic and inorganic, machine and animal, epistemé and techné, matter and intelligibility, macro and micro’, is one with the claim that they might be ‘desiring-machines’, connecting, then disjoining and differentially con- joining former binaries in the creation of difference. Thus, as Barad observes, researchers of these creatures are not external observers but they are engaged in the co-constitution of ‘we’ and ‘they’; they are entan- gled, and as ‘subject’ and ‘object’ are mutually constituted. Similarly, the bodies of Brittlestars are not passive materiality awaiting the meaning- giving acts of culture and history, for ‘intelligibility and materiality are not fixed aspects of the world, but rather intertwined agential performances’ (Barad in press). When bodies are performances not things, the specific embodiment of an entitity, whether Brittlestar or human being, is that of ‘the being of the world in its dynamic specificity’ (Barad in press). And yet, Barad’s encouraging reformulation, even as it breaks up linear causality, binary thinking and being through constant intra-action in dif- ferential becoming, remains within the limits of that structure of differ- ential becoming, as does the concept of differentiation set out by Deleuze. In Barad’s formulation as in Deleuze’s, mind is a specific material con- figuration, or as Deleuze argues, an assemblage of affects and percepts connecting, disjoining and conjoining with one another. As Barad defines it, differential becoming implies the repetition of a significant pattern for which there will be a variety of differences among its phenomena. For both, contingency lies in particles; every assemblage of particles produces a different world, a different entity, an unpredictable entity, but within the range of a particular pattern oriented by an attractor (Rouse 2004: 147). An attractor is defined as a set of states, invariant under the dynamics, which neighbouring states in a given basin or arena approach asymptotically in the course of dynamic evolution (http://mathworld. wolfram.com/Attractor.html).6 This model underscores the difficulty if not impossibility of distinguishing object and world or subject and object. Barad makes reference to quantum physics, and the idea that the position of any entity characterises the entire arrangement or assemblage within which it exists. Thus that within certain arrangements only posi- tion and not momentum can be determined because that system has no definite momentum apart from the intra-actions of phenomena with the environment (Rouse 2004: 149). However, even in experimental situa- tions where it is difficult to identify a phenomenon by means of a repet- itive pattern in an environment, it is still the intelligible pattern of the experiment that reveals the unintelligible complexity of the environment (Rouse 2004: 149). Thus intelligence and intelligibility formally account for the Brittlestar’s ongoing differential self-articulation, but do not take the Brittlestar’s own sensibility into account. From the point of view of intelligible differentiation, which is a view from ‘outside’, Brittlestar sen- sibility is unintelligible. The structure described by Deleuze is strikingly similar. Every subject or object is an event, nothing but the result of con- tingent affects and percepts which are themselves independent of and exceeding any living being, standing on their own, simply expressing a pure sensation – freeing it from objects and from states of a subject (Deleuze and Guattari 1994: 163–7). In addition, every event is an effect of concepts, prospects and functives (the objects of logic and mathemat- ics). That is, forms of content (structured materialisations) and their forms of expression (structures) intra-act, constitute and define one another. Were the world not an ongoing process of trajectories differen- tiating themselves, there would be no intelligence either. It seems then that the binary thinking that arose most powerfully with the conception of an ego cogito has at last been overcome. And the implication of this is that all binaries, including those powerful cultural signs such as male- female, heterosexual-homosexual, rational-emotional, active-passive, and so on, have come undone. Deleuze, in particular, is quite specific about the mechanism by which this occurs. Citing the Cartesian will to distinguish doubt from certitude, Deleuze notes that making such a distinction presupposes the good will of the thinker and the good nature of thought, that is, the expectation that iden- tity, analogy, opposition and resemblance will be accompanied by the ‘I think’, such that I conceive, I judge, I imagine, I remember and perceive become the four branches of the cogito and ‘difference becomes an object of representation always in relation to a conceived identity, a judged analogy with other genera, an imagined opposition of predicates or a per- ceived similitude’ (Deleuze 1994: 137–8). Difference, differentiation and even repetition are lost to recognition in a concept, distribution through analogy, reproduction in imagination and resemblance through percep- tion (Deleuze 1994: 145). These aspects of the cogito do nothing to disturb thought; they are clearly objects of recognition whereby thought recognises itself in things and in the comfortable certainties of the cogito. What is problematic is that truths generated in this manner are, in fact, no more than hypothetical, they assume or presuppose exactly what is in question and therefore lack certainty, if that is what is meant by absolute necessity (Deleuze 1994: 139). What forces us to think differently is pos- sible through a violent disjunction in the logical sense of this term. Deleuze points out that in The Republic, amid the violence of Socrates’s encounter with the sophist Thrasymachus, Socrates recalls the Idea of justice, an Idea not able to be remembered on the empirical level. Yet, influenced by empirical, moral motives, Plato misses the opportunity to cast aside common sense and the empirical, and thereby clouds thought. Faced with the claim that something is both just and unjust, Plato insists on making sense of the empirical realm and insists on the law of non- contradiction and the law of excluded middle. The former establishes that for any proposition, that proposition and its negation are never both true, and the latter, that for a given proposition and its negation, at least one must be true (Hass 2002: 75). As Marjorie Hass has argued, sym- bolically, logical contradiction is a structural relation of dominance and erasure because it constructs difference in terms of exclusion (2002: 76). The law of excluded middle or contrariety is less hierarchical insofar as a single term may have a variety of contraries that need not indicate the lack of a specific property, so that if both contraries are asserted, the system does not collapse. Yet, Plato and Aristotle generally presume that the contrary of a term is not a pluralistic set (such as bad, sad or unre- pentant, for the term good), but that the contrary of good is nongood, reinstating privilege and hierarchical unity (Hass 1998: 35–6). Deleuze, as such, seems to use the idea of contrariety in this latter sense, as commensurate with non-contradiction. For Socrates, contrari- ety disrupts common sense and compels even the Socratic soul to probe, to problematise, ‘arousing thought in itself’ (Plato 524e).7 But in the end, the sensible discordant encounter with contrariety must be harmonised. Coaxing Thrasymachus to become gentle, to cease being angry, Socrates upholds the law of non-contradiction and the law of the excluded middle, thereby affirming binaries and their hierarchical structures. Seeking to escape this fate, although caught up in the same logical system, Deleuze proposes something other. As we noted above, he proposes a spacetime, a manifold, in which nature is associative, commutative and distributive, where association is opposed to unity, and the laws of nature distribute parts which cannot be totalised, so that nature is conjunctive, expressing itself as this and that, this or that, rather than as Being, One or Whole. That things exist one by one without the possibility of being gathered together is the expression of purely external relations of associ- ation within this spacetime field, an immanent field. Such relations are further characterised in terms of the chance collisions of particles that exist one by one and are not unified or governed by a divine or tran- scendental principle. Instead, they are connected by means of differential relations where the construction of vector fields are organised by the functions of differential calculus. In other words, Deleuze proposes a purely formal model, bypassing the empirical and commonsensical. In order to overcome the limits imposed by Socrates’s refusal of con- trariety and non-contradiction, Deleuze proposes an image of thought unsullied by the opacity of physical existence, that is, an image set free from recognition, similarity, identity and analogy. Qualitative opposition within the sensible is quickly tamed by common sense which knows that contraries cannot coexist in the object. The simultaneity of contraries which violates the logical law of excluded middle, according to Deleuze, can only be thought; it can only be thinking. It is thought that is pure dif- ference, differentiating itself in a continuous trajectory. It will be the same for memory, imagination, language, for all so-called faculties. This tran- scendental empiricism is empirical only insofar as it designates as imper- ceptible and unthinkable that which takes place at the empirical level and thereby immediately transcends it (Deleuze 1994: 144). Opposition (con- trariety), resemblance, identity and analogy are effects of this thinking in the empirical realm where common sense and the law of non- contradiction prevail. For the faculties, there is only violence, the violence of not harmonising or unifying one another, instead disjoining all that they encounter. Disjunction of the faculties is their discordant harmony. This is how its elements exist one by one without the possibility of being gathered together. First, thought undergoes its clash with the unrecognis- able sign, the being of the sensible, not sensibility itself. The sign defies common sense and good sense, which is the ‘coexistence of contraries, the coexistence of more and less in an unlimited qualitative becoming’, which can never be sensible, which is always only given as a sign (Deleuze 1994: 141).8 Then, in place of one’s own sensibilities, there is the violated ‘soul’, the fractured I that is forced to pose a problem and in the trauma of this violence to forget anything that can be recalled, anything seen, heard, imagined or thought, in order to think and recall that which has never been empirical, which is transcendental with respect to both sensibility and memory, thus, what is essentially nonsense and forgetfulness. In the midst of this original violence, the faculties themselves are forced to their limits, meaning they are forced into discordant harmony, their disjunc- tion, the open-ended disorder of the faculties, so that each may pursue its own ‘essential’ projects, the transcendental projects of thinking, willing or imagining (Deleuze 1994: 140–1).9 If a faculty is forced to its limit, this does not imply that it reaches some end, but rather that it moves forever, closer and closer, towards some point without ever crossing it. Transcendentally, in a purely formal sense, in the realm of thought, binaries are overcome and the formal Idea, rather than determining that something is male or female, animal or vegetable, remains indeterminate. But does this translate into an empirical world for which we can say the same, for which Barad seems to want to claim the excluded middle? For Deleuze, outside of the formal transcendental realm of thinking, willing and judging, we succumb over and over again to non-contradiction and the law of the excluded middle. Yet, following Barad, it seems that the terms ‘difference’ and ‘diverse’ are concepts resonating in the world, and that they inhabit the sensible realm, those states capable of being for- malised by the differentiating continuum of the transcendental sphere. Care must be taken, for Deleuze, all particles enter into the indetermi- nate Idea and its n-dimensions consisting of variables or co-ordinates. There they maximise the sets of relations between changes in variables and become defined as elements, effects of sets of relations, which do not change until the Idea itself alters its order and metric, until a new Idea is posed. The notion of limit in mathematics certainly implies this.10 Although the conception of the problematic Idea that undergoes contin- uous differentiation/differenciation is a conception that undermines the recognition, representation, habituation, equalisation nexus of classical, modern thought, replacing it with the Idea of difference and the diverse, an important question remains. Does it contribute to conceptions of intra-activity beyond the formal and external description of particles? Does it characterise the Brittlestar’s own sensible existence (Deleuze 1994: 245)?11 Let us briefly examine this. It has been remarked that, We are used to the idea that a physical theory can describe an infinitude of different worlds. This is because there is a lot of freedom in their application. Newton’s physics gives us the laws by which particles move and interact with one another, but it does not otherwise specify the configurations of the parti- cles. Given any arrangement of the particles that make up the universe, and any choices for their initial motions, Newton’s laws can be used to predict the future. [. . .] Newton’s theory describes an infinite number of different worlds, each connected with a different solution to the theory, which is arrived at by starting with the particles in different positions. However, each solution to Newton’s theory describes a single universe. (Smolin 2001: 42–3) Every trajectory in each universe is defined by laws that specify the move- ment and interaction of particles. But even for dynamical differential systems, the rules of motion are given, what may be contingent are the particular particles themselves, that is, which particles enter into any given trajectory and in what order? Which affects, percepts, concepts, prospects and functives? In an open system, such as that proposed by Barad and Deleuze, as opposed to Newton’s closed universe, this cannot be predicted, thus every configuration of particles produces not only a different world, but an unpredictable world. But what does not alter are the rules themselves that specify the movement and interaction of parti- cles. Moreover, in these worlds, space and time are given not emergent. They are the pre-given, pre-existent manifold, and time is simply a para- meter of any space whatever, a fourth dimension, a means for differen- tiating different spaces, but not an emergent and unpredictable reality. Where the spacetime manifold is always, already given, creation per se disappears insofar as predictability is a requirement of the system. We have noted Barad’s proposal that for quantum physics, such pre- dictability seems to disappear, since the position of any entity charac- terises the entire arrangement or assemblage within which it exists thus that within certain arrangements only position and not momentum can be determined because that system has no definite momentum apart from the intra-actions of phenomena with the environment (Rouse 2004: 149). But is this uncertainty not merely a function of our starting point, the fact that even a differential system operates as a classical system in a pre-established continuous spacetime manifold? Is it not possible that from another perspective, something else altogether may be taking place? In other words, if we want the excluded middle to operate not only for- mally (logically, mathematically) determining entities from the outside, but also, physically, sensibly, from within, then we must find a model of sensible life that makes this possible. Let us begin then with a brief ques- tioning of sense and sensibility, in order to think about the problems arising with the retreat to a purely formal system that eschews what we will call, not the common sense empirical, but the sensible. And let us consider positing, not an empirical individual subject to non- contradiction and the law of excluded middle, but a vulnerable sensible intuition that is not merely a singular event, a singular agent, an effect of formal processes, but is itself a new structure in which what point of view exists does so as a crowd. Many readers will be familiar with the image of a cone the philosopher Henri Bergson utilised to characterise ontological memory, that memory created by the imperceptible influences of states in the world on an indi- vidual sensibility. The cone describes a situation in which the entire past coexists with each new present in relation to which it is now past. Describing this in terms derived from the theory of general relativity, Bergson states that ‘memory, laden with the whole of the past, responds to the appeal of the present state by two simultaneous movements, one of translation, by which it moves in its entirety to meet experience, thus contracting more or less, though without dividing, with a view to action; and the other of rotation upon itself by which it turns toward the situa- tion of the moment’ (1988: 168–9). The light cone is a well-known struc- ture in physics. It assumes particular importance in the theory of general relativity. General relativity tells us that the speed of light is invariant and nothing (no causal effect and no information) travels faster than the speed of light. ‘The causal past of an event consists of all the events that could have influenced it. The influence must travel from some state in the past at the speed of light or less. So the light rays arriving at an event form the outer boundary of the past of an event and make up what we call the past light cone of an event’ (Smolin 2001: 58). By drawing a light cone around every event, we may specify all the causal relations affecting it. Doing this with every event would yield the causal structure of the uni- verse. This is significant insofar as ‘most of the story of our universe is the story of the causal relations among its events . . . [but crucially and unlike differential dynamical systems] the causal structure is not fixed . . . it evolves, subject to laws’ (Smolin 2001: 59). The question is, of course, how? ‘How many events are contained in the passage of a signal from you to me . . . How many events have there been in the whole history of the universe in the past of this particular moment?’ (Smolin 2001: 60). Or, how many events constitute a point of view, making it not an individual subject to the law of non-contradiction but a crowd for which the law of excluded middle obtains? The answer to these questions depends on the nature of spacetime. Barad and Deleuze assume that space and time are continuous. This means that they can be (at least in thought) divided infinitely, that there is no smallest possible unit of space or time. This implies that for any event, at least on the level of particles, it could always be faster and the number of events, being infinitely divisible, could be infinite. Such assumptions are non-physical, since no physical person or thing can travel faster than the speed of light nor can it be infinitely divided. However, another emergent approach to this question is worth consid- ering, that is, the idea that space and time are discrete.12 If space and time are discrete, they cannot be infinitely divided and the number of events or states may be very large, but it is still finite. What this suggests is that continuous or smooth spacetime may be useful illusions but that the world consists of discrete sets of events that can be counted (Smolin 2001: 61–2). Referring back to the conception of light cones, rather than a single cone, a single event, let us think about a causal network of inter- connected states for which every perspective and every state consists of a multiplicity of cones linked to one another, influencing one another, ‘combinatorial structures’ that have been called ‘spin networks’, net- works giving rise to situationally-organised, intra-active behaviour. Such a concept is the work of a young physicist, Fotini Markopoulou, who is searching for a physical description of the universe, thus one that is not based on the physically impossible but mathematically con- ceivable notion of infinite divisibility of continuous spacetime. What Markopoulou proposes is a causal structure of spacetime that codes, not the view from outside, that Barad and Deleuze utilise, but rather, what an observer inside the universe can observe (Markopoulou 1999: 1). Arguing against classical models precisely because, as Barad points out, they lead to uncertainty, Markopoulou suggests utilising causal sets (large collections of causal relations), sets of events in discrete spacetime partially ordered by causal relations. Moreover, Markopoulou proposes to work with evolving sets that give the causal past of each event as well as the causal structure of each event in a causal set. She further suggests that evolving sets satisfy a particular algebra called Heyting algebra which utilises a non-standard logic whose historical development has been related to understanding the passage of time. This logic is called Intuitionistic logic and unlike standard symbolic, binary logic it does not forbid the so-called ‘excluded middle’. Whereas the classical Boolean mathematician believes that a statement x is true or false whether or not she has proof for it, Intuitionism does not allow proof by contradiction. Thus, from the onset, it does not consider x to be true or false unless there is a proof for it. In other words, if x may be true tomorrow or false tomor- row, without a proof the option is open, thus Intuitionistic logic is suited to time evolution, where certain physical statements become true at a certain time (Markopoulou 1999: 34–5). In this manner, the logic used by observers to describe what they see has been modified. Moreover, any single observer is able to know only a subset of true facts regarding their universe (Markopoulou 1999: 1). What is crucial here for my point is that ‘a theory with internal observ- ables is fundamentally different than a theory describing a system exter- nal to the observers’, as the former obey Intuitionistic logic and the latter obey so-called Boolean logic and observe the law of non-contradiction (Markopoulou 1999: 2). Of equal importance is the idea of a theory that refers to observations made from ‘inside’. For physicists, this means inside the universe, and such observations can only be partial, that is, they contain information that is in the causal past of an observer in a par- ticular region of spacetime. They do not contain information about the so-called future, information that should be obtainable from a classical dynamical perspective. In terms of light cones, this means that informa- tion that constitutes a particular point of view intra-acts within the boundaries of any light cone where space and time are not taken to be infinitely divisible or infinitely extensible. Even though we are operating entirely within the realm of linear causality, there is not single wave func- tion for the entire universe, that is, what is being measured or described is the evolution from each spacetime to another spacetime. Spin network graphs have been used to model quantum spatial geometry and events in a causal set that are evolving, yielding a quantum causal history (Markopoulou 1999: 3). One significant implication of this model is that unlike dynamical systems, the manifold of spacetime is not pre-given. Rather than the Brittlestars dynamically changing form of content and form of expression which takes place in a pre-established spacetime man- ifold and is produced or assembled from outside by the elements of that manifold, the model of quantum causal histories specifies that spacetime and the states that evolve, the stage and the actors, evolve together (Markopoulou 2002: 3). This is particularly useful for the exploration of states that occur at a scale where classical physics fails, the Planck scale of quantum states, and additionally, it allows for the construction of a point of view that is not at all an individual but can only be called a crowd, a point of view according to which different observers ‘see’ or ‘live’ partly different, partial views of the universe, partial views which nonetheless overlap. How can this be? If the causal past of an event consists of all the events that could have influenced it, these influences travel from some state in the past at the speed of light or less. We have noted that the light rays arriving at an event form the outer boundary of the past of an event and make up the past light cone of an event. Under these conditions, the causal structure of states evolves and the motion of matter is a consequence of that evo- lution. And we have asked, following this model, what if continuous dif- ferential spacetime (so-called smooth space) is just a useful illusion?  What if, from the perspective of a different system, the world can be said to be composed of discrete states, states on a very small scale, but never- theless, states discontinuous with respect to both space and time on that very small scale? Under such conditions, what might be observed? Is it possible that this structure and these processes might involve the con- struction of a vulnerable and sensitive contingency, an ontological spatio- temporalisation, an ever-changing perspective made up of a crowd of perspectives in the heterogeneity of space and time? Such a perspective, if it is thinkable, if it is real, could manifest itself as a sort of history, but a complex causality, layers and layers of states, always susceptible to realignment, to patterns and particles resolving in a point of view that is the effect of a crowd of influences and itself contributes to a crowd of influences. These conical flows of information, often imperceptible, influ- ence one another, and in this they influence the sensibility of all things. Given that this is something extremely difficult to situate, it is much more likely to be overlooked. If it is the manner in which states (includ- ing very tiny states) influence and alter one another, this implication is that these states influence and alter sensibility, all sensibility. These influ- ences are not the objects of perception nor of consciousness; they cannot be experienced as increases or decreases of power, as the raising or low- ering of intensities. They are, at least, capable of receptivity. If they are noticed at all, it is usually only insofar as they are felt, felt as pleasure and pain, discomfort and distress. Their influence on sensibility comes via a sensory system, thus they do not constitute a personal memory. This might be the way Brittlestars evolve in an absolute, immediate, non- conscious consciousness, an ontological unconscious whose passive exis- tence no longer refers to an individual or to a being but is unceasingly suggested in the reflection, refraction and dispersion of light, in a spec- trum. But how are we to study and understand such states? What is our access to this felt pleasure and pain and in what manner might it indicate the existence of states that influence and alter our sensibility and that of Brittlestars? Researchers in the cognitive sciences have been examining precisely these questions. Thus let us turn to some of their work in order to study the influence of such very small states that are felt as pleasure and pain. It has of course been well noted that within the cognitive science tra- dition the ‘temptation to conflate emotional feelings and cognitive processes remains rather too prominent’ and that scientifically important distinctions can be made between affects and cognitions (Panksepp 2005: 11).13 Although the precise dividing line between affective sensations and cognitive processes is difficult to draw, there are credible ways to distinguish them (Panksepp 2005: 32). The great mystery is how feeling occurs and influences bodies. The French physiologist Michel Cabanac, now working in Canada, affirms the necessity of differentiating not only affective sensation and cognition but also sensation and perception. Although psychologists made this distinction as early as the eighteenth century, it was blurred by the otherwise important advances in the study of perception by the Gestaltists who incorporated sensation and content into global experience. Given the tendency of such theorists to refer almost exclusively to auditory and visual perceptions, which are the prin- cipal channels of communication among humans, other sensory inputs which are less complex were ignored (Cabanac 1995: 403). Another dif- ficulty in characterising sensation comes from the attempt to characterise sensation in terms of its attributes. Certainly, sensation has attributes but which ones? Is it quality and intensity, duration and extension, clearness, affectivity? And what about attributes such as vision that have their own attributes like light and colour or sound which has pitch and volume? As we can see, a simpler descriptive model of sensation might well be called for, since not all sensations have all attributes and some sensations may have attributes that exceed the definitions (Cabanac 1995: 404). Cabanac proposes an alternative model based on the idea of multidi- mensional scaling, that is, sensation as a multidimensional response to a stimulus. Cabanac’s abstract model incorporates four dimensions, quan- tity or intensity, quality (the nature of the stimulus), affectivity (useful- ness with respect to pleasure and displeasure), and duration, insofar as temporal synthesis is intrinsic to all affective sensations. If temporality is a fourth dimension of a multidimensional structure, then it can be under- stood, as we have maintained, as a stage that emerges only with and in terms of its contents or actors and does not pre-exist them. In identify- ing the quality, Cabanac urges us to focus on the sensation itself in addi- tion to the receptor organs. This is facilitated by separating the idea of sensitivity from that of sensation. Thus sensitivity can be defined as the capacity of an afferent neuron to detect a physical or chemical change at its endings and to transmit this information to nervous centres where the sensor may be an organ or simply a free nerve ending, or not identifiable at all. Afferent pathways may consist of as few as one neuron or a chain of them. On the other hand, sensation is defined in terms of cognition. ‘The brain possesses properties that can no more be explained by its neu- ronal constituents than life can be explained by the atomic or molecular properties of the constituents of the living cell. Consciousness is one such property and sensation can be defined as the emergence of sensitivity into consciousness’ (Cabanac 1995: 407). The important implication here is that sensitivity and thus sensation are not limited to the five senses but may occur at any point in the body with a few minor exceptions. Many afferent pathways are limited to a bundle of a few neurons whose meagre input is overwhelmed by that of the classical senses, which also have the advantage of large, fast and frequent spikes in their ‘A’ fibres rather than the weaker ‘C’ fibres of other neurons (Cabanac 1995: 409). Although neurons are larger than Planck scale, neurons consist of highly ordered networks comprised of microtubules and other filamentous structures which organise cellular activities. Paramecium sensory input and move- ment, cell division (‘mitosis’), cell growth, synapse formation and all aspects of co-ordinated functions are accomplished by microtubules, cylindrical polymers of the protein tubulin arranged in hexagonal lattices comprising the cylinder wall. It has been speculated that these qualify as quantum phenomena. Additionally, insofar as there are neurons in the human body that may be triggered by even a single photon (a quantum event), it may be reasonable to assume that quantum sensitive neurons are playing a significant role in the construction of sensitivities (Penrose 1989: 400–1; Hammeroff and Penrose 1996: 507–40; Cabanac 1995: 408). The speculative implication of this would be that every ‘one’, every so-called individual is constructed as a crowd by the many but not infi- nite influences of intersecting light cones over time. Cabanac maintains that any afferent pathway is a potential sensitivity, yielding everything from visceral sensations in the limbs, neck and chest to heartbeats, movements in the abdomen and other physical urges (1995: 412–13). The list of potential sensitivities may extend to a sensi- tivity for speed and even for time. Moreover, the lack of adequate words with which to describe the more ephemeral sensitivities serves as a barrier to acknowledging them. Since peripheral sensors adapt quickly to cir- cumstances, the intensity of a sensation can be understood in terms of the frequency of spikes arriving at the centres. Cabanac connects the affec- tivity of sensation directly to the experience of pleasure and displeasure. Pleasure-displeasure may occur on the sensory level as the enjoyment of a stimulus. It may also involve aesthetics, desire in the sense of a fulfilled need and accomplishment. The last three require greater understanding and would seem best characterised as intentional sensations. Cabanac places pleasure and displeasure on a single affective gradient from the extremely negative or distress to the extremely positive or delight. It is, ultimately, the wisdom of the body that engages the organism in its own sensations and leads it to seek pleasurable sensations and avoid unplea- surable ones (1995: 415). But the affective dimension is a contingent one, meaning whether a given sensitivity is felt as pleasure or displeasure varies with the internal state of the subject, for the subject tends towards relative equilibrium whether it results from pleasure seeking or auto- nomic responses (shivering or sweating for example in the case of cooling or warmth). One of the great advantages of conceptualising non-intentional feel- ings in this way is precisely its simplicity. If it is the case that any affer- ent fibre may arouse a sensation, it does not require a high level of behaviour or rationality for the body to make use of its own feelings of pleasure and displeasure (Cabanac 1995: 414). Furthermore, pleasure and displeasure are linked to the well-being and happiness of the organ- ism. Of course, pleasure, along with feeling in general, has never been a topic that philosophers have embraced, bringing into play, as it does, the morals of pleasure opposed by the morals of duty (Cabanac 1995: 415). Yet, the value of pleasure/displeasure is one with the view that our knowledge of the world and our intentional relation to the world is ‘fil- tered’ by the so-called chemicophysical window of our own sensitivities and then again by the biological and cultural formations of our brains. As Cabanac expresses this, what we think about sensitivity and sensation might well influence how we think and, I would add, what we think. This latter because sensation links us to our environment in a way that does not preclude cognition but gives rise to it. It may be the case that phylo- genetically, sensitivities emerged into consciousness as sensations when they proved useful to the organism. They allowed the organism to become aware of environmental stimuli in a multidimensional rather than singular context. Not just vision, smell, sound and touch, but myriad possible sensibilities, interrelated and influencing one another, making it possible to discern what in the environment might be useful and what might be harmful, constituting that organism’s duration, its immanent temporality, making it possible for organisms to anticipate and to change. Without this nothing new would occur. If organisms possess similar neurons and afferent pathways, and if these pathways transmit information to the brain from the common environment, then the conclusion is that all conscious events are likely to have the same or a similar structure. There is no question but that this is a highly specula- tive thesis, constructed on speculative theories in physics and cognitive science, but nevertheless it seems to be a much more hopeful theory. To state that every living thing is a point-of view that is constructed from within through its vulnerable sensitivities, and that it is not constructed as a singular entity, but as a crowd, seems to hold profound implications for our self-understanding as well as our social, political and environ- mental constructions. For, the very same information that constructs ‘me’ may also be said to be constructing ‘you’, for everywhere in the universe there are photons, light rays coming from the past, influencing us, con- structing us, so that we are, every one of us – a crowd. The legal regulation of sex/gender is one of the most obvious ways in which sexuality and sexual identity are subjected to formal social control. For example, the legal status of sex/gender has recently been debated in the public domain in the U.K. in the context of new legislation governing transgendered people (the Gender Recognition Act 2004) and same-sex partnerships (the Civil Partnerships Act 2004). However regulation of sex/gender is not only achieved through legislation, but also through social regulatory systems which introduce and perpetuate sex/gender norms, including cultural representations and images which support hegemonic norms of sex roles and gendered behaviour, and undermine non-dichotomous or queer alternatives. It is in this sense that I would argue that law is “not radically distinct from culture and politics, but is simply one of a number of ordering mechanisms and is thoroughly imbued with the dominant philosophies”. Engaging with law therefore means engaging also with the social regulatory norms underpinning law, since these norms may in fact have a much more direct and immediate regulatory effect on the self than the positive laws they construct and are constructed by. The discussion that follows focuses on a particular example of socio-political and cultural conflict over the regulation and meaning of sex/gender and, implicitly, sexuality. I will examine social regulation of sex/gender roles, and the implications of this for the negotiation of sexuality, through various cultural/political appropriations of the image of Elvis Presley. Images of Elvis are often deployed commercially, as explored by Dave Wall, who examines the intellectual property rights claims made regarding images and representations of ‘The King’. Indeed, Elvis was, until he was overtaken in 2006 by Kurt Cobain, the deceased lead singer of the band ‘Nirvana’, who was branded as number one in the list of ‘Top-earning Dead Celebrities’. This paper goes beyond commercial uses of the image of Elvis to discuss the ways in which the iconic masculinity and sexual identity of Elvis have been redeployed by particular individuals and social groups, and the implications this has for the socio-political meaning of sex/gender and sexuality. In particular the paper explores how the image of Elvis is used by some to try to queer the cultural stereotypes which form the basis of the social regulation of gender roles (for example by lesbian drag king performers) and yet is also often used as a sign of unthreatening familiarity to support traditional heteronormative ideas of masculinity and gender roles (for example by the campaign group Fathers 4 Justice). I will argue that these re-appropriations of Elvis have both shored up and also undermined traditional constructions of sex/gender and sexuality. One might say that this is not surprising given this particular moment in the genealogy of sexuality and sex/gender, which appears to be marked by fierce debate over the social practice and meaning of sex/gender, including masculinity, as discussed below. In that sense, similar strategies can be used by very different social groups to support competing and even antithetical notions of how sex/gender should play out in cultural and political life. While many LGBT groups across the globe are campaigning for formal legal equality and civil rights such as the right to marry or adopt children, there is an ever-burgeoning radical queer and performative politics of sexuality focusing on for example intersexuality and transgender issues, highlighting also the importance of the relationship between these radical political movements and other critical political actors such as feminists and queer theorists. Similarly, while masculinity is reasserting itself through for example the formal equality claims of fathers’ rights groups such as Fathers 4 Justice, it is also clear that, as Collier argues, traditional roles for men in society generally as well as in the family are contested and in flux. In this socio-political context then, it is perhaps unsurprising that battles are waged over the representation and meaning of certain cultural images of sex/gender. The motto of the San Francisco-based Elvis impersonator ‘Extreme Elvis’ is: “Every generation gets the Elvis it deserves”. My aim in this paper is to examine the Elvis currently invoked in this particular moment in the evolution of sex/gender and sexuality discourse and politics, and to argue that this tells us something about the Elvis we deserve. Indeed, perhaps the Elvis we deserve is not one Elvis but many different Elvises; this is evident form not only the proliferation of Elvis images, impersonators and fan club members but also the many different meanings and representations of sex/gender that can be “read off” the bodies and practices of mimicking individuals or groups. The argument that follows examines two specific cultural representations of sex/gender and sexuality in which the use of the image of Elvis has been noteworthy. Initially I will begin with a discussion of the ubiquity of the image of Elvis in general cultural life, as well as in relation to sex/gender and sexuality, particularly in the U.S., before moving on to examine two particular ways in which the image of Elvis is currently discursively deployed in the social performance and representation of sex/gender and sexuality. The Official Elvis Fan Club of Great Britain has more than 20,000 members, and as such is one of the largest fan clubs in the world. Annually, there is an Elvis Week, culminating in the “Elvis Insiders Conference”, run by the U.S. official fan club in Memphis to coincide with the anniversary of his death on August 16, 1977. The year 2005 marked Elvis’s 70 birthday, an anniversary which gave rise to a huge number of television and radio features on ‘The King’, as well as interviews with both Priscilla and Lisa Marie Presley in the wake of their 2005 biography, Elvis: By the Presleys. And, of course, 2007 marked the 30 anniversary of Elvis’s death.  There is such a wealth of information available about Elvis, and his image and music are so immediately accessible, that we may all think we know who Elvis is. The ‘pop artist’ Andy Warhol, famous for his large scale representations of every day objects and images such as Campbells soup cans, appears to have chosen iconic figures such as Elvis and Marilyn Monroe as subjects for his art because of their very accessibility and familiarity as public images, but also because they personified the American dream of success. Warhol’s 1962 picture “Red Elvis”, and his 1963 “Silver Elvis” display of 28 almost life-size paintings (blown-up reproductions of a still photograph from the 1960 Elvis film Flaming Star), exaggerate and proliferate, almost exceed the powerfully familiar celluloid character. It is Elvis as a readily recognisable, mass produced image that forms the essence of Warhol’s ironically banal, repetitive portrayal of this cult universal figure: “Warhol took these endlessly reproducible images and reproduced them endlessly”. Warhol is in effect imitating an image – as are Elvis impersonators. Likewise, in Warhol’s pictures, even the replicated image is based on a photograph that is not an “original” but is a publicity still. His multiple copying of a copy “celebrates and redeems the everyday repetitions in our lives”. We recognize Elvis, then, primarily through his culturally mediated image, and in this sense there is a level of confusion between reality (the embodied Elvis) and Elvis as purely cultural image/representation. He is known, familiar, and yet unknown, unreal. As Patty Carroll has said: “Elvis is someone with whom many people relate very directly. He is not an abstract image in the way Jesus has become to many people. We know what Elvis looked like throughout his life, we all know stories about his behaviour, his family, his  home and we can still meet his friends. He is both a larger-than-life myth and simultaneously a real person in our hearts.” The familiarity of Elvis, and the globalisation of mass media, makes him incredibly accessible to many people across the world. In his lifetime Elvis had 107 ‘top forty’ hit records, including 18 number ones, and made 33 movies. However his presence as an icon is amplified by, for example, the many other films which use the image of Elvis, or Elvis impersonation, as a central element of the plot, such as Mystery Train (1989), Wild at Heart (1990) and 3,000 Miles to Graceland (2001). Incredibly, there is also the phenomenon of Elvis impersonation (some performers prefer to say interpretation which occurs worldwide, and is undertaken by all sorts of performers in different cultural contexts, further proliferating his global image. Examples include: Asian Elvis, Yoshi Suzuki (who not only dresses as Elvis but imitates his speaking voice for talking books); the “Flying Elvi” (American skydiving Elvis impersonators); Evangelistic Elvis (Gary Stone, a U.S. Sunday school teacher and church Deacon who performs Elvis’s gospel songs); Black Elvis from London, Colbert Hamilton; a Norwegian Elvis named Kjell Elvis; and women impersonators, such as Elvis “Ginger” Gilmore and Di Gregory “Elvis the girl” (from the U.S.), and Janis James and Enid Butler (from the U.K.). In 2000, the U.K. online magazine The Naked Scientists made the following (tongue in cheek) observation: “There are now at least 85,000 Elvis’s around the world, compared to only 170 in 1977 when Elvis died this rate of growth, experts predict that by 2019 Elvis impersonators will make up a third of the world population”.Each impersonator arguably seeks to perform/portray a better - a more authentic or true - Elvis than all the others, but as Yoshi Suzuki says, each inevitably brings “their own individual magic to the spirit and legacy” of Elvis. In some Elvis tributes, the reproduction does not try to actually be the original but emulates a particular image of the original, and even tries in some way to be better than the original, to be an ideal image, since there is usually no sign of the illness and self destructive behaviour that characterized Elvis’s later life. For many, the element of fantasy in performing as Elvis may represent their own dreams of fame and success. This prompts the question as to what it is that opens up Elvis to such constant emulation and re-reading by so many different individuals and groups. Carroll suggests that performing as Elvis allows people to touch the ‘inner Elvis’ within them – that is, to become more like themselves, but in a way that maximizes their sex appeal and their sense of fun. In addition, for some performers, imitating Elvis is a calling which finds them rather than the vice versa. Likewise, Brittan suggests that in performing Elvis, impersonators not only become the King, but in their own rendition, ‘rebecome’ some aspect(s) of themselves. But what can this phenomenon of the ever increasing proliferation of the image of Elvis tell us about representations of sexuality, masculinity and sex/gender? The proliferated image is usually one of three incarnations, since Elvis’s career and public image are commonly (simplistically) viewed as involving three stages of progression: the young musical teen idol Elvis, Hollywood Elvis, and Las Vegas jump suit Elvis. However these “phases” do not demonstrate a linear progression of distinct Elvis identities. Reading Elvis through the lens of sex/gender demonstrates not only a temporal shift in public image but also an apparent inherent incoherence with regard to the relationship between the Elvis image, and sex/gender and sexuality. Elvis as the “personification of sex” is not a stable image, and recognising this allows for the inherent instabilities within categories of sex, gender and sexuality to be illuminated. Investigating these different periods in Elvis’s career demonstrates the fluidity of his image, and by association, the instability of the categories of sex/gender and sexuality that each image personifies. In what way could Elvis’s image be said to be unstable? Firstly, as Rodman reminds us, some of the most famous stories about Elvis, especially those that document his rise to fame, are subject to competing interpretations; there are so many ‘myths’ about Elvis (what Rodman calls ‘non-verifiable facts’) that it is often difficult to know the truth of any particular Elvis story. Secondly, there are some contradictions evident within the plethora of Elvis images themselves. Elvis in his early incarnations (especially in the 1950s) has been described by cultural theorists as the epitome of masculinity and virility, and of “dangerous” sexuality, through his sexual gestures and energy, his youthful rebellion, and the crossing of various racial/musical, even class boundaries. For example, some have suggested that he brought, or appropriated, “black music” such as gospel and blues into the mainstream white culture. With regard to the sexual(ized) aspect of his persona (which Rodman argues is inextricable from the question of his use of “black music”), Frith and McRobbie (1979) referred to his performance of masculinity as “cock rock”. Sue Wise in her essay on Elvis refers to him as a “butch god”. At the same time however he was also referred to as a teeny bop pop idol due to his huge popularity amongst young girls.There is then an initial contradiction between the reading of Elvis as teenage idol (clean beautiful, virginal, all-American pin up boy) and Elvis as sexually open, suggestive and challenging - as popular mythology goes, in initial television appearances, cameras only showed Elvis ‘The Pelvis’ from the waist up (Garber 1997, p. 172). In his ‘Hollywood star’ guise, Elvis was cast in many films as a young rebellious character, often getting into trouble due to a combination of his own temperament and bad luck/injustice, and pushing the boundaries of traditional all-American teenage masculinity. Like James Dean he represented the “personification of the restless American youth of the mid-50's”. Further, in his early films such as Jailhouse Rock (1957), Elvis does not play the part of a ‘nice boy’, the pin-up that young girls would be eager for their mothers to meet, but instead takes on a darker, edgier and less sympathetic role. In Jailhouse Rock in particular we see displayed what contemporary criminologists such as Tomsen (1997) would describe as clear links between masculinity, alcohol, sexuality and provocation to violence (ending in imprisonment). But even in Jailhouse Rock we have an Elvis who experiences an epiphany, and towards the end of the film he becomes more self aware and vulnerable through the experience of injury and trauma. His friendship with fellow inmate and musician Hunk is portrayed as deep and lasting despite their quarrels. In fact his refusal to hit Hunk during their one physical fight is described in the film as a “true act of love”. Here we see another facet of the multiplicity of the Elvis image. In Jailhouse Rock, despite moments of traditional masculinity and machismo, there are also moments of a different kind of masculinity, one based more on homosocial bonding. Duffet makes a similar argument about characteristics of Elvis that are less sexualized and less stereotypically butch, such as Elvis’s shy deprecating style. The traditional reading of Elvis as a sex god, argues Duffett, eclipses the more platonically masculine reading of Elvis as representing a close personal friend, a view supported in Duffet’s research by the fans whom he interviewed. Again therefore, we see an apparent contradiction between the dark rebellious character portrayed in some of the early films such as Jailhouse Rock, and Kid Creole (1958) and the perception of him as the quieter, fraternal and more vulnerable “Elvis as friend”. The Las Vegas ‘pantsuit’ Elvis on the other hand takes us a stage further both in Elvis’s career and in terms of the sex/gender connotations and meanings associated with the physical image of Elvis in this phase. Here we have the most mainstream familiar and arguably unthreatening, image of Elvis, despite the arguably feminized image of him in rhinestones and the Liberace inspired gold-sequins. When Elvis appeared in Vegas in 1969, wearing makeup and a white jumpsuit, his fans were, according to Garber, “middle-aged matrons and blue-haired grandmothers who praised him as a good son who loved his mother”. Despite vestments which might seem to be markers of womanhood particularly associated with feminized performers of the period such as Liberace - jewelled buckled belts, lamé capes, furs and the like – and that might now be read as camp, Elvis appears in this moment not as a cross- dresser but as the ultimate male theatrical performer, regal in his demeanour and dress - the mature, wholesome, family man, and family entertainer. In this moment he is a desexualized version of his earlier identity, no longer characterized by his pelvic thrusts. And although this period in Elvis’s life also brought, in time, a physical change in image, where his body became increasingly marked by the pleasures, and one might say excesses, of food and drugs, the early Las Vegas years show him to be performing as a confident, mature, almost domesticated version of his former sexual self. The power of Elvis, it seems, is that he manages to inhabit these various mythologies and images simultaneously. And these various and apparently ‘contradictory’ interpretations of Elvis are also evident in the array of contemporary re-appropriations of his image. Rodman suggests that the image and music of Elvis have been used to articulate a wide range of struggles from the Gulf War in 1991, to election campaigning, to abortion. This paper extends Rodman’s analysis into the context of struggles over notions of sex/gender/sexuality, by presenting two examples of the redeployment of Elvis’s image that have been achieved through physical impersonation. I will examine these sex/gender struggles then, firstly through analysis of the performances of drag kings, and secondly through examination of the activities of a U.K. based fathers’ rights campaign group called Fathers 4 Justice. As these two groups look towards Elvis as a means of either playing with or attempting to secure heteronormative sex/gender categories, the image of Elvis is harnessed, but never ‘caught in trap’. Elvis himself remains a shifting symbol of many and often competing notions of what it means to be a sexed/gendered person in the world. Specifically, an analysis of the use of his image by these two groups prompts two conclusions: first, a common traditional reading of Elvis as the epitome of masculine prowess and predatory sexuality is one that is open to queering– and in fact this image has been queered, or at least manipulated, by both groups to a certain extent; and second, that the very instability of the image of Elvis itself is the thing that allows for the renegotiation and representation of other unstable concepts – sex/gender and sexuality. I argue that these two very different examples of the current deployment of the Elvis image are open to a more complex reading than simple impersonation, and that they can tell us something particular about contemporary debates about sex/gender and sexuality, and perhaps about the Elvis we deserve. The phenomenon of drag kings – women (usually lesbians) impersonating and performing as men - is not a new one. Drag kings, through the theatrical representation of hyper-masculinity, are challenging heteronormative notions of masculinity and sex/gender: “to ‘king’ a role can involve a number of modes of performance, from earnest repetition to hyperbolic re-creation and from quiet understatement to theatrical layering”.  Drag kings have many different styles of ‘kinging’, but often have names designed to provoke a wry smile, satirising the core aspects of traditional masculinity, for example Mo B. Dick, Will Hung, and Holden Cox. However it is particularly appropriate here that one of the iconic male figures that drag kings have frequently chosen to emulate is the king (queen) of all (drag) kings – Elvis himself. Or more accurately, Elvis Herselvis.  Elvis Herselvis, based in San Francisco in the US, is probably the most famous Elvis impersonating lesbian drag king, so famous in fact that she has her own impersonator. Travelling the world as Elvis Herselvis, performing Elvis’s songs with her band The Five Straight White Males, she has been heralded by the US newspaper “USA Today” as a cross between Elvis and kd lang. She claims that she does not perform directly as Elvis himself but as Elvis Herselvis, a lesbian Elvis impersonator While most male impersonators seem to concentrate on the older Elvis of the Las Vegas years, Herselvis prefers to focus on a younger more  ‘subversive’ Elvis: “When you think of Elvis, don't think of the man in the white jumpsuit; think of that dangerous boy who was crossing the race barrier, the sex barrier, and scaring all those people ... that's what he was all about.”  It is apparent from the performances and practices of drag kings that there is evidence of women/girls (re)claiming as well as ridiculing, certain aspects of masculinity. But this act of performance also reveals something about the relationship between the image of Elvis and the social meanings that attach to sex/gender/sexuality. Drag kings are not merely copying hegemonic masculinity; there is, through a parody of the Elvis image, a complex process of regendering, where performers are constructing, performing for themselves, a new interpretation of sex/gender. In order to address use of the image of Elvis as a means to confront sex/gender, it is necessary to briefly remind ourselves of Judith Butler’s argument that sex/gender are constructed, performative, and yet can also be performed. Gender is... a construction that regularly conceals its genesis; the tacit collective agreement to perform, produce, and sustain discrete and polar genders as cultural fictions is obscured by the credibility of those productions - the punishments that attend not agreeing to believe in them; the “construction” compels our belief in its necessity and naturalness. For Butler, gender is performed in the sense that it is a “stylized repetition of acts” rather than a concrete stable and immutable identity, “a set of repeated acts within a highly rigid regulatory frame that congeal over time to produce the appearance of substance, of a natural sort of being”. Gender is not about choice, but about the reiterated citation of a norm or ideal. And this reiteration and citation is compulsory in the sense that one does not qualify as a girl unless one repeats the performance of femininity.  Therefore, according to Butler, there is no actual or real pre-existing gendered identity which exists before discourse, since there is no pre-discursive subject, and there is no such thing as real or unreal gender/gender identity. There is no “doer” behind or outside of gender but only through gender. This is performativity. Performativity cannot be reduced to single acts of performance by drag kings. However these individual performances are significant in their own right as challenges to heteronormativity. In the context of the argument here, masculinity cannot be seen as natural but as continually (re)constructed through repetition. Therefore masculinity can also be disassociated - dismembered - from the male body. This is achieved through practices of performance, such as those demonstrated by drag kings. In terms of the relationship between performativity, gender and sexuality, Butler also emphasises that there is no correlative, linear line between sex, gender, sexuality, fantasy, performance and practice. Some of these things may line up together to give a “coherent” picture of the self, but some may not. Lived experiences of sexuality always exceed the gender performance, because there are always aspects of sexuality which are not expressed, which do not appear and “which, to some degree, can never appear”. Butler is however careful to distinguish performance, in the context of drag, from performativity: Performance as bounded “act” is distinguished from performativity insofar as the latter consists in a reiteration of norms which precede, constrain, and exceed the performer and in that sense cannot be taken as the fabrication of the performer’s “will” or “choice”; further what is “performed” works to conceal, if not to disavow, what remains opaque, unconscious, unperformable. The reduction of performativity to performance would be a mistake. Butler explains that gender identities are often parodied by individual performances such as drag, cross-dressing, and the playing out of lesbian butch/femme identities. These forms of ‘play’ have evoked a sense of unease for those feminists who interpret drag and other such practices as simply unquestioningly replicating the worst aspects of gender roles that are proscribed by a dominant and oppressive, misogynist, heterosexist regulatory regime. For example, Jeffreys criticizes Butler and these notions of masquerade, playful repetition and parody; she maintains that if all gender is masquerade then surely it must be impossible to distinguish between parody and real, so that there is no real, and “thus the revolutionary potential (of such parody) must be lost”. Jeffreys simplistically reduces performativity to “traditional gay male cultural forms with lesbian role-playing added in for balance”. Her critique of the concept typifies a particular kind of misunderstanding of Butler, which views performativity as being about choice, and about “swapping gender” at will. This critique of performance and performativity is misplaced, and underestimates the potential for practices, such as drag, to challenge heteronormative notions of sex/gender. Indeed, the fact that there is no real is entirely Butler’s point. Indeed for Butler, drag, parody, lesbianism and homosexuality are not copies of heterosexuality, but rather heterosexuality and homosexuality, masculinity and femininity are all copies of an idealized notion of a naturalized heterosexuality. In fact, “gender is a kind of imitation for which there is no original”. Heterosexuality is only “natural” in as much as it is repeated over and over, and therefore, the more drag or homosexuality “expropriates” and co-opts these gender “norms”, the less regulatory power will reside in heterosexuality, and the more its “claim to originality is exposed as illusory”. There is no “real” category of gender which a subject can finally achieve, since all are neither real nor unreal. Garber expresses a similar view when she makes the claim, based on the 1986 essay by Joan Riviere, that “womanliness is mimicry, is masquerade”. Thus gender is open to subversion in the sense that it can be mimicked through exaggeration, that is, “hyperbolic exhibitions of ‘the natural’ that, in their very exaggeration, reveal its fundamentally phantasmic status”. Drag demonstrates that a particular set of “ontological presuppositions” operates to regulate sex/gender and that this set of presuppositions is “open to rearticulation”. The aim of drag is to question the totality or coherency of heterosexuality. Therefore drag does not set itself up in opposition to heterosexuality, but rather is able to expose, through the exaggerated miming of heterosexuality, the fact that heterosexuality is quietly (and sometimes not so quietly) assumed. In this way, drag can demonstrate the non-linear and non- proscriptive way that sex (anatomy), gender, gender performance and sexuality interact, as well as their contingency. Arguably this hyperbolic mimicry is also what makes Andy Warhol’s repeated use of the larger than life(size) iconic image of Elvis, and others, challenging and provocative. Even though Elvis is known to us, and accessible to us through representations of his image that surround our everyday lives, he has an almost Butlerian “phantasmic” status as untouchable and unreal because of his fame. The nearer Warhol brings Elvis to us, the farther away we realize he is – he is rendered a simple facsimile, a copy of a copy. The performative view of gender echoes with Judith Halberstam’s description of the artist Del La Grace’s photograph of the Elvis impersonator Mo B. Dick as a “copy with no original”, implying, again, that the ‘original’ image of Elvis is in itself a constructed copy of an ideal. Yet Butler herself points out the dangers of a blinkered approach to the potential of parody, that in itself parody is not subversive. Rather, some kinds of parody disrupt and “trouble” the heterosexual normative ideal whilst others “become domesticated and rearticulated as instruments of cultural hegemony...”. Likewise drag is not necessarily subversive and does not automatically call heterosexuality in question. Thus what drag does is contribute to the hegemonic norms even as it calls them into question. This kind of “double gesture” is common in Butler’s understanding of performativity, where our repetitions can both underpin and subvert gender norms simultaneously. Still, drag has tremendous potential to aid us in the project of interrogating normative constructions of sex/gender ‘reality’. Indeed, one might argue that these kinds of theatrical performances are especially interesting and important for an understanding of contemporary legal and social regulation of sex/gender and sexuality, because the performance of sex/gender in our everyday lives is the very stuff of which law is made. The notion that gender is performative is not simply rooted in an analysis of social practices that are abstracted from law – these citational and reiterated gender norms that Butler refers to are also firmly embedded in the letter and practice of laws as well as social practice. Consider for example, the issues faced by trans women who use women’s bathrooms but who are often, in the cases that come before the court, perceived to be men. For these women, the every day ‘performance’ of turning up in a space where one is not expected, thus defying the embodied practice of normative categories such as sex/gender, occasions both legal and social sanctions. As Julie Lassonde has explained: “most of everyday law is conducted performatively and not in writing. Our daily life interactions are embodied. They do not need to be recorded on paper to be effective”.  Drag king performances therefore enable us to question the social regulatory norms underpinning the hegemonic binary sex/gender system, but also the laws that construct (and are constructed by) those norms. Building on Butler’s analysis we can see that drag kings are not passing as the other/opposite sex. The performance of drag kings embodies the parodying, and re- appropriation, of elements of masculinity which constitute normative understandings of sex/gender and sexuality. Women dressing as men - wearing wigs, suits, facial hair, prosthetic penises and the like - underscore the most salient and socially recognisable markers of masculinity whilst simultaneously demonstrating that these characteristics are not “natural” but can be appropriated, performed. These practices decouple masculinity from the body, and hence from nature. In this way, ‘kinging’, as opposed to camp drag, focuses on the de-authentication and denaturalisation of masculinity: Whereas camp reads dominant culture at a slant and mimics dominant forms of femininity in order to produce and ratify alternative drag femininities that revel in irony, sarcasm, inversion, and insult, kinging reads dominant male masculinity and explodes its effects through exaggeration, parody, and earnest mimicry.  Drag king performances are copies of socially constructed identities – copies with no original. Further, the fact that Herselvis herself has impersonators emphasizes that these women are playing with the ‘reality’ of gender, refracting gender through a series of parodic lenses. Drag kings reveal the performative status of gender because their performances as men are not wholly convincing (nor are they intended to be) because a single bounded act of performance cannot take the place of multi-layered, repetitive prescriptions of gendered behaviour. Indeed the imperfect replication provides the parodic humour of the performance. There is an additional layer of complexity within a drag king’s choice of Elvis as a role-playing model which confounds heteronormative understandings of sex/gender in a way that other impersonation or drag king performances do not. Elvis is arguably not the most macho, butch role model of masculinity, since the image of Elvis is also open to be read as feminine - pretty, delicate, shy and vulnerable – all traditionally characteristics associated with women. Garber also claims that like women, Elvis is merchandized, objectified, commercialized – it is no coincidence that both Elvis and female can precede the noun, impersonator. So, in impersonating Elvis, are drag kings impersonating a female impersonator? Following this train of thought, Marjorie Garber, examines Elvis’s own performances, reading Elvis as what she calls an “unmarked” cross dresser, one whose glittering vestments and make-up onstage, show him to be challenging traditional boundaries between masculinity and femininity. Although this might seem “counter-intuitive” - Elvis is not a female impersonator and would never have been perceived as transvestite - Garber demonstrates, through analysis of his clothes and trademarks, a latent unconscious transvestism (and therefore a fundamental challenge to gender norms) which is in fact central to his success: make-up, jewelled clothes, pearls, his gold lame suit, spangles and rhinestones. In his early days of performing concerts he dyed his hair (the well known shock of black wavy hair was in fact brown) and was known to wear eye make-up – a fact that apparently rather disconcerted his concert organizers. Add to this the fact that as popular mythology goes, Elvis is said to have placed either lead bar or a piece of rolled up cardboard down the front of his trousers to create the impression of what Garber, quoting George Melly, calls “a weapon of heroic proportions”, a technique commonly employed by drag kings to enhance their masculine appearance and to increase the perception of sexual ‘prowess’. While in the beginning Elvis may have appeared androgynous, the image of Elvis developed to the point where it can easily be read as transvestite, at least in the sense that it lends itself to reappropriation by those wishing to challenge the limits of heteronormativity. These images of Elvis call into question boundaries of music, race and class, but also heteronormative conceptions of sex/gender/sexuality. He was what Garber calls a “living category crisis”. While it cannot be claimed that Elvis was intentionally impersonating a woman, this reading of the feminisation’ of Elvis allows the boundary between masculinity and femininity, maleness and femaleness, indeed the performance of gender itself, to be contested: “transvestism is a space of possibility structuring and confounding culture”. The instability of the image of Elvis himself allows for various and multiple interpretations and appropriations of different aspects of his personality and sexuality, and this in turn illuminates the instability of gender. Arguably the radical potential of lesbian drag kings like Elvis Herselvis is that they do not try to fit within one of the dichotomized sex/gender/sexuality categories, but rather in emulating Elvis they inhabit a temporary third (or other) category, one which is produced by, and  produces, not just a crisis of masculinity/femininity, but a “crisis of category itself”. This third place however is not a stable coherent identity or even term – as Garber says: “The ‘third’ is a mode of articulation, a way of describing a space of possibility”. Drag kings who emulate Elvis (and, on one reading, perhaps Elvis himself) are in this way challenging, at the most fundamental level, the idea of a binary sex/gender system, and the idea that these binary categories are natural and real. The drag king presentations of the gendered body on stage, as a parodic reinterpretation of an image that already confounds sex/gender/sexuality, is, in this post-modern and arguably queer world, an Elvis that we deserve.  Alongside this version of Elvis, however, there are other interpretations. In the next section I examine the second mimicking practice that negotiates and emulates the image of Elvis, offering an analysis of the performance of Elvis presented by the UK fathers’ rights group ‘Fathers 4 Justice’ (F4J). F4J was a self styled “civil rights” campaign group, who have been known to describe themselves as “an evolutionary dynamic movement”. After 3 years of campaigning the group temporarily disbanded in January 2006, following negative publicity arising from a report in the U.K.’s The Sun newspaper that some of their “extremist” members had been linked to a secret plan to kidnap Leo Blair, the son of the then U.K. Prime Minister, Tony Blair. However F4J’s guiding principles and practical strategies demonstrate that cultural images, here specifically the image of Elvis, can be used just as easily by those who experience confusion, anger and fear in response to postmodern challenges to sex/gender categorisations and norms, as by those who delight in contesting heteronormativity. In stark contrast to the challenges posed to sex/gender/sexuality offered by drag king appropriations of Elvis, F4J have deployed images of ‘The King’ to quite a different end, that of supporting traditional heteronormative and dichotomous notions of sex/gender. I argue here that a contemporary ‘crisis’ in sex/gender and masculinity demonstrates how cultural images are reclaimed, not only by those wishing to confront traditional dichotomous notions of sex/gender/ but also by those such as F4J who attempt to shore up the boundaries of social, legal and political sex/gender roles. F4J campaigned for fathers’ and grandparents’ rights of access to children subsequent to divorce, usually by means of direct action. Operating from the perspective that the courts in the U.K. have interpreted the ‘best interests’ or welfare test for children in family law cases, as being in reality about the best interests of the mother, they considered themselves (and other relatives such as grandparents) as victims of reverse discrimination. One of its most vocal and public supporters has been the Irish musician and anti-poverty campaigner Bob Geldof. F4J have campaigned through what they call a “twin track strategy based around publicity and press”, and the aim of the group is: “Raising awareness through publicity 'making the injustice visible' and mobilising a 'dads army' – applying pressure to the system and MPs to bring around meaningful change and enforce the will of Parliament”.  The group explicitly intimated that they were fashioned upon a peaceful, direct action approach: “Fathers 4 Justice advocates peaceful non-violent direct action based on the Greenpeace model with a dash of humour thrown in for good measure.” Previous campaigns include an episode of invading and flour bombing the House of Commons in Parliament with purple flour, and forcing the closure of Tower Bridge in London for 6 days by climbing and occupying a crane at the side of the bridge. In addition, masked in the garb of comic superheroes, campaigners have also become known for well publicized and disruptive action such as climbing Buckingham Palace, and handcuffing themselves to members of Parliament.In 2003, as part of a Valentines Day protest, a group of fathers from F4J dressed up as Elvis Presley and delivered a giant inflatable heart, inscribed with the words “End Fathers’ Heartbreak” to Dame Elizabeth Butler-Sloss, the then President of the Family Division, at the Royal Courts of Justice. This campaign was based on criticism of judges and the courts which, they claimed in 2003, were refusing to enforce contact orders, and two years subsequent to divorce were leaving 40 per cent of fathers without contact with their children. Renaming the court ‘Heartbreak Hotel’, they carried a large stereo which was playing the song that was Elvis’s first number one hit in 1956. Despite this invocation of early Elvis music, the group chose to wear jumpsuits studded with rhinestones – drawing upon images of a later Elvis incarnation than Heartbreak Hotel might suggest. Unlike Herselvis then, F4J conjure up a more mature and unthreatening familiar, familial, desexualized figure of Elvis from his early Las Vegas years (rather than the later Vegas period which was characterized by drug use). The group generally have aimed to challenge a common portrayal of masculinity as being errant, and irresponsibly absent from the family. Additionally, their demands for access to child custody is based on the belief that father absence is the root of many and varied social ills, and therefore that families need fathers. It is also connected to what Collier calls the politicisation of masculinity and the introduction of the “assertive father”. This involves a discursive as well as political (re)turn to the father as the key player in the family, as a response to a contemporary disintegration of rigid gender norms and roles, especially in relation to the family and the workplace. For example, the social and political vilification of single mothers is no longer as widespread as was once the case; IVF is increasingly available to single and lesbian women (the U.K.’s Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority Code of Practice, which governs the allocation of IVF, no longer contains a provision in the ‘welfare of the child’ section of the guidance requiring the IVF facility to have regard to the child’s ‘need for a father’); lesbian relationships can now be sanctioned (and some would say domesticated) by the state under the 2004 Civil Partnerships Act; and more than ever before, women of all classes are present in the labour force. Thus F4J’s campaigns can be seen as one form of reaction against these shifts in gender relations, and a response to the perception that men’s discrete spaces within the family (and the workplace) are currently under siege. The actions of F4J then, are significant. Collier stresses that these kinds of men’s groups should be taken seriously, not least because they tell us something about “changing configurations of gender”. He explores the ways in which father’s rights groups have presented their version of contemporary heterosexual paternal (as opposed to patriarchal) masculinity – the father as victim, the caring, respectable, hard-working (and yet rejected) family man - as a challenge to traditional hegemonic masculinity. Instead of revelling in they are protesting about their absence as fathers, usually by way of claims to formal equality rights which are mediated through direct action protests. In taking to the streets, to cranes, to Tower Bridge, what F4J are really doing is performing a type of masculine role - a visible, physical, strong, angry form of masculinity - which is no longer available to them, either within the family or in other social interactions. F4J have also performed and impersonated other well known figures such as Spiderman, Batman and Robin. However this does not undermine the claim that F4J employ familial and safe images and characters to publicly represent their campaign. While it may be true that these other figures are not open to the same feminist/queer reading employed herein, arguably the use of these ‘super-hero’ characters still attempts to re-centre the father as the key figure in the family who is responsible for ‘saving’ the family in the face of social ‘evils’ such as lone motherhood. In any case, this paper is concerned with the cultural re-appropriation of a particular image – Elvis - by specific social groups in order to show firstly that the power of the image resides in the way that it is presented and interpreted, and secondly that Elvis in particular is a pertinent example of the multiplicity of possible performances of an image, undertaken by different groups for different and competing ends, precisely because his image is itself unstable. However, it would seem that what F4J are really targeting by way of these protests about fatherly absence, and by way of these ‘new’ interpretations of masculinity, is not the patriarchal concept of a constraining and controlling, non-caring masculinity, but in fact the demise of the heterosexual nuclear family unit, and in particular the diminishing role of (or need for) the father within the family. Rather than being progressive and radical, the activities of a group such as F4J can be read as a backlash against the growing independence of women and the rise of single parent/lesbian families. It is a reactionary move by a group of men who feel threatened by the socio- economic changes which have undermined men’s traditional roles and their authority the family. Their campaigns may be read as exemplifying the practical difficulties, identified by Connell and Messerschmidt, of developing and encouraging new, positive patterns or forms of hegemonic masculinity which are open to possibility of equality with women. Nevertheless, Collier warns us against taking a uni-dimensional view of the actions of F4J and other such men’s right groups. He stresses that theirs is not simply an anti- feminist reaction and that the anger and sense of injustice underlying the strategies of F4J are also explained by other factors. One such factor is the notion that there is nowhere in law to express these real feelings of anger and frustration. Law is, in essence, a place for rational argument devoid of emotive demands for justice or compassion. Connell and Messerschmidt contend that: ‘Without treating privileged men as objects of pity, we should recognize that hegemonic masculinity does not necessarily translate into a satisfying experience of life”. The sense of “loss and vulnerability”experienced by these fathers as a result of shifts in perceptions and meanings of fatherhood, of malehood itself, cannot be voiced in the legal arena. Therefore we should not be surprised, says Collier, when men turn to F4J for a community based direct action campaign where they can perform in public their most inner felt, unheard and explosive emotions. That is not to say that these men are not anti-feminist in their politics, only that F4J and similar groups do not come about through what Collier calls a “uni-directional form of power”. And yet, while reactionary, the practice of these men, coming together to challenge the letter of the law as well as judicial practice with regard to the custody of children, is in itself challenging to at least some traditional views of masculinity, in that it is based on empathy and strongly emotive homosocial bonding. Their group campaigns also nudge into view similar meetings of male Elvis fans gathering at conventions and fan club gatherings. Duffett describes the intense emotional response (many call it love) to Elvis that is experienced at these fan meetings which is not sexual but creates deeply felt bonds. Collier likewise describes the strong and real emotions (this time stress, anxiety and anger) that drive campaigning fathers to gather together to challenge the law. As in Elvis tribute meetings, these emotions provide the basis for “legitimate solidarities”. And like the Elvis fan club members, on one level the men involved in campaign groups like F4J are contradicting a traditional paradigm of masculinity in that through highly emotional and vulnerable homosocial bonding activities they confront certain norms of hegemonic masculinity. In their respective spaces then, Elvis fans and F4J each finds a space to perform a particular kind of masculinity which in some sense undermines heteronormativity, since seeking to assert masculinity from within what Collier calls communities of men, is, as he says, fraught with the ever present danger of the spectre of homosexuality. However, in coming together dressed as Elvis, F4J invoke, through the use of the image of the Vegas Elvis, a mature traditional masculinity, harking back to a familiar, unthreatening and benevolent father figure who is the lynchpin of the family, iconic, irreplaceable, the ruler – indeed, ‘The King’. As argued above, Las Vegas Elvis is regarded by at least some fans as being in essence a good son, a family man - indeed, the epitome of what Collier says F4J are looking for in the concept of fatherhood itself: “a key provider for men of a sense of secure stable masculine identity”.Collier argues that in a climate of divorce and separation, and growing challenges to men’s roles in the family, the workplace and wider society, children may provide meaning to men’s lives. Custody of and legal access to their children is therefore bound up with a male sense of identity in that fatherhood endows a secure and stable sense of self. Again we can see that the underlying themes driving the actions and strategies of F4J are related to the desire to hang on to rather than deconstruct stable identity categories. F4J’s performance of, through impersonation of, Las Vegas Elvis is in this way in stark contrast to the challenge to the very concepts sex/gender posed by drag king interpretations of ‘The King’. This is not to say that F4J have in some way managed to solidify the (or even an) essence of Elvis in their attempt to harness his image for their own ends. While the group have identified strongly with one face of Elvis, and have used this to try to present a stable image of fatherhood, this does not serve to ‘domesticate’ or capture Elvis as a single image - nor does it ensure the success of their campaign. Indeed, it is somewhat ironic that F4J have chosen to represent their cause through this Las Vegas moment in the chronology of Elvis images since it is at this stage in Elvis’s life that his drug use and other extreme indulgences impact negatively on his ability to perform as an entertainer (and arguably, as a father). In looking to Las Vegas Elvis for a stable image of masculinity and father, F4J do not reify Elvis, in the same way that the performances of drag kings do not reify Elvis. Rather, what this analysis of F4J activities – and the practices of drag kings - demonstrates is that the image of Elvis can be used in competing ways simultaneously, and yet is also always open to other, simultaneous and further readings, whether conservative or progressive.  The activities of F4J have been greeted with ambivalence. After the flour bombing of the House of Commons in May 2004, the Guardian ran an article quoting from various press cuttings on F4J from different news sources. On the one hand there is scepticism and dismissal of the validity of the campaign, particularly the methods: Fathers 4 Justice ... do not deserve a place in history alongside the suffragettes. Apart from anything else, they do not seem very bright: it has not occurred to them that their escapades only reinforce the stereotype of the irresponsible male. On the other hand, some have supported the view of these fathers as victims and supported their cause: The last great movement of liberation - after racial equality, gay rights and feminism - is surely masculine emancipation ... It can either take the form of marginalized, malignant masculinity such as Fathers 4 Justice. Or it can be supported by women who have everything to gain from happier men.  Whether one takes the view that F4J are really a group of responsible, caring and safe (heterosexual) men and fathers, or that they represent ‘errant’ fathers, irresponsible, or even absent fathers (many campaigners have been criticized for spending so much time on direct actions that they have not spent enough time with their children), F4J does not represent a challenge to the assumed dichotomous and binary nature of masculinity/femininity. While there is a strong argument for recognising a diversity of masculinities, the embodiment of masculinity by F4J, through their appropriation of the image of Elvis in his early Las Vegas years, amongst other ‘superhero’ figures, though arguably offering an alternative view of masculinity, represents a familiar, mature family man. This use of Elvis cannot be seen as a challenge to the deeply ingrained dichotomous binary categories of masculinity/femininity in the same way that the performance of drag kings (and possibly Elvis himself) can be. In that sense there is nothing particularly progressive or feminist about F4J’s engagement with masculinity. Although they might be “doing gender”, i.e. performing a particular kind of masculinity, such as the jump-suited Elvis of Las Vegas, F4J might also be read as a longing for the familiar, and a call to return to traditional gender roles, despite the camp glitz of their Las Vegas Elvis campaign. Elvis here appears “largely as a mythical figure, a signifier whose signifieds are ultimately not connected to his life or his art”. What this means is that the image of  Elvis can be twisted, queered, for many purposes, and that it is just as likely to be used to shore up binary categories of sex/gender/sexuality as it is to challenge them. We cannot tell in advance whether and how images, theories, approaches and strategies will be re-appropriated by different groups. Images and signs are therefore neither good nor bad in themselves, but rather can form the basis of many varied strategies. As Herman has pointed out, “all strategies... are potentially available to all those seeking it”. In the words of Foucault, the point to emphasize is that “not everything is bad, but that everything is dangerous, which is not exactly the same thing as bad”. It is also possible that we can understand, from the performances of both drag kings and F4J, multi-layered readings of Elvis that exceed even the intentions of those who deploy his image. One may be tempted then to suggest that Elvis is operating here as something of an empty sign that could be filled with and used to promote or represent almost anything at all (as may also be suggested by Warhol’s depictions). However Rodman rejects this idea; he sees Elvis’s image as intimately bound up with deeply embedded and often contradictory cultural myths, and therefore too rich to be fully understood as a “blank slate”. Arguably then, the essence(s) of Elvis can never be fully captured by the reappropriation of his image through the activities and practice of social groups; ultimately Elvis remains tantalisingly out of reach. The plurality of images of Elvis is not bad, then, but rather, as we might be led to believe from his celluloid rebellious image, potentially enabling and challenging, and yet also potentially conservative and reactionary – i.e. dangerous. It is in this latter conservative sense that F4J are building on rather than confronting traditional sex/gender roles, and to this extent it seems fitting that they have deployed the most mainstream and unthreatening of the Elvis images. However there is an irony inherent in the fact that these battles over the definition and place of masculinity in society are being played out through the issue of fatherhood, where Elvis is used as a role model for the campaigning fathers. Elvis and Priscilla Presley divorced when Lisa Marie, Elvis’s only child, was 4 years old, and by the time she was 9 he was dead. Elvis, it seems, was/is the quintessential absent father (despite the claims of some fans that he is still alive and possibly working in a fish and chip shop). It is somewhat paradoxical then that F4J would embrace Elvis as their front man in their campaign for increased post-divorce contact rights with children. Has Elvis left the building? His image and persona live on, not just for fan club members but also for those wishing to use his image to communicate something about sex/gender/sexuality, and particularly the contested nature of masculinity. This appears to be a moment in the genealogy of sex/gender/sexuality where there is humour, play, and yet also for some confusion and crisis over sex/gender categories and norms. Contemporary social relations are characterized by the increasing empowerment of women and serious challenges to traditional forms of masculinity, in the family, the workplace and in intimate relationships. As Halberstam puts it, there has been a “sea change in sexual mores and in gender norms”. The last decade or so, one might say, has been marked by an anxiety about sex/gender/sexuality and the questioning of masculinity and appropriate gender roles for men. This is demonstrated by, on the one hand, the actions of F4J who campaign for what is essentially a discrete place and role for fathers, at the centre of family life, based on heteronormative ideals of sex/gender, and on the other, the performances of drag kings who exploit, confuse and ridicule – indeed queer masculinity. Both practices respond to, as well as construct, the decentring of masculinity and heteronormativity within social relationships. In this moment Elvis has proved to be a productive site for challenging, negotiating and yet also perpetuating contemporary heteronormative sex/gender/sexuality categories. As Taylor and Laing said in the 1970s, “an analysis is needed not only of rock music’s genres and signifying practices, but also of their relations to the proliferating discourses around sexuality”. Simon Frith in his work rejected the idea that any performer could have one unambiguous meaning, because individuals are always recognising themselves as “gendered subjects” prior to listening/watching. In that sense, the reception of any image, including Elvis, cannot be “read off the surface of the text”. Talking about his relationship with fame at a press conference in 1972, Elvis said: “The image is one thing and the human being is another, it's very hard to live up to an image.”Berger has argued that the image itself has no power but that which the performer/reader gives to that image. An image is (infinitely) reproduced and thus used for many and various purposes, and can “lend itself to them all”. I have argued here that the image and music of Elvis can both “prop up” and “disarm dominant masculinities”. Hence, one reason it is difficult to live up to the image of Elvis is because there is not just one image but a proliferation of images, and some of them do not sit easily alongside one another. Within this proliferation lies, unsurprisingly, internal contradictions, in particular with regard to the reading of Elvis as hyper-typifying masculinity, androgyny, and femininity. Such contradictions are demonstrated in the re-appropriation of Elvis’s image as at once providing a masculine role model, and also a character for lesbian role-playing. The ways in which particular social groups have engaged in cultural re-interpretation of the image of Elvis offer us another opportunity and discursive space to challenge the coherence and stability of sex/gender and sexuality themselves. What the use of the image of Elvis by such diverse groups as drag-kings and F4J allows us to see is that at this moment, issues of sex/gender/sexuality are fiercely contested in a manner and to an extent that is unprecedented. And yet, at the heart of most of these contested claims are groups and individuals seeking dignity in their own lives, families, communities and homes. The challenge to sex/gender norms continues beyond this example into the 21 century on other fronts too – for example in the debates over gay marriage and gay adoption; and in intersex and transgender claims to self-definition, and to rights claims regarding legal validation of their lived sex/gender. Perhaps from the ashes of these fires there will emerge yet another Elvis that we deserve? Thank you to Richard Jones for early discussion of these ideas, and incisive comments, to Victor Tadros for encouragement and lively conversation, and to Justina Molloy for patient and good-humoured proof-reading (twice). Thanks also are due to Vanessa Munro for comments, and in particular to Gillian Calder for the illumination of several crucial light bulbs and for ongoing inspiration generally. Sincere gratitude is owed to Simon Halliday for his ongoing commitment to the Elvis project, especially for his film short, “Increasingly Elvis”, and to Richard Collier for sending me a preview copy of his 2005 paper on F4J. I also wish to thank the participants of the “Taking Elvis Seriously” stream at the Law and Society Conference, Las Vegas, June 2005 for taking this paper seriously, particularly my fellow Elvis impersonators Peter Robson, Guy Osborne and the delightfully ubiquitous Steve Greenfield. And finally, thanks to Dave Wall, whose Elvis impersonating budgies is where it all began. Totemic American queer theorist Judith Butler is famously reluctant to readily allow herself to be slotted into stable identity categories. Early in her career she outed herself as a lesbian, only to question what being a lesbian means; more recent proclamations of her butch identity are similarly undercut by temporal distancing. Yet in one respect she has maintained a consistent identity position: in common with many Americans, she roots herself in Europe: ‘I am an American, but I am trained in European philosophy. Only decades ago, I was part of a family that understood itself as European Jews,’ she says, the European- ness of her thinking borne out by the vast and forensic knowledge of European philosophy which she deploys throughout her oeuvre, engaging sustainedly with such thinkers as Hegel, Foucault, Lacan, Derrida, Freud, ??i??ek, and Irigaray (Undoing Gender, 201). Many of the most influential thinkers on her work have been French, or are at least associated with French intellectual life. A similarly strong French influence is perceptible in the work of other pioneering American queer theorists, such as Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick, Leo Bersani and Diana Fuss. Sedgwick develops her notion of the glass closet and its epistemologies in part through a reading of Proust; Bersani also reads Proust, and develops his notion of ‘homoness’ by reading Jean Genet; Fuss draws on Lacan and Fanon to scrutinize identification and sexuality, whilst Butler draws heavily on both Foucault and Irigaray already in Gender Trouble, establishing a pattern to be reiterated frequently in later works. It is fair to say, then, that American queer theory is deeply rooted in European, and specifically French, thought. At least, the first wave of it has been, but it does not necessarily follow that this remains the case. Today, American queer theory no longer looks to the canonical queer thinkers I have cited above to power its ideas. To fully understand the extent to which a traffic in thinking between France and the US lies behind the development of queer thought on both sides of the Atlantic, it is important to look beyond the canonical names associated with the first wave of American queer theory to consider more recent State-side formulations of the queer project articulated by a new generation of scholars. This will update and renew our understanding of the transatlantic queer dialogue, enabling us to discern the extent to which later articulations of queer may perpetuate a transatlantic intellectual exchange by informing or drawing on French thought. This article will therefore consider contemporary French and American theorizations of queer specifically in relation to a recent departure in Anglo-American queer theory: the rise of ‘post-queer’. Post-Queer Born in the USA The concept of ‘post-queer’ emerges somewhat hesitantly in the new millennium as a result of various developments both within and beyond queer theory. Crucial to understanding its emergence is an awareness of the tensions and fractures which materialized in Anglo- American queer studies and lesbian and gay studies in response to the development of the concept of ‘queer’. Ultimately, the notion that the deconstructive logic of ‘queer’ could serve as an intellectual powerhouse able to unlock and scramble systems of meaning, and also function as a politically potent force able to effect material change to the benefit of sexual minorities, comes to be very considerably weakened in Anglo-American academic and activist circles alike. This follows a sustained critique from within queer studies and queer activist circles of the ideas, ideologies and logic espoused in certain seminal texts of queer theory, particularly Butler’s Gender Trouble. These criticisms, and the counter-criticisms which answered them, tended to crystallize around issues of identity: on the one hand, deconstructive queer theorists were accused of being ‘anti-gay’ or of ‘de-gaying gayness’ (Bersani, H, 5) because of their refusal to straightforwardly accept concepts of identity built around categorizations of sexuality, such positions provoking considerable antipathy amongst those anxious to reclaim a stigmatized sexual identity by asserting a positive force to that identity, and who saw little promise in assertions of the power of resignification. On the other hand, deconstructive queer theorists attacked ‘identitarian’ approaches which, as they saw it, colluded with the oppressive mechanisms of power responsible for stigmatizing dissident forms of sexuality by insisting on fixed categories for sexual orientation. Meanwhile, the whole enterprise of using ‘queer’ as an umbrella term to try to foster inclusiveness, not segregation, by bringing together lesbians, bisexuals, gay men, and trans or intersexual people was sorely challenged when ‘queer theory’ was seen to be based on exclusionary logic — or even prejudice — that left minority ethnic groups and trans or intersex people isolated. Queer theory thus comes to be perceived as stuck in an impasse largely created by the politics of identity and identity politics, and faith in queer as a productive mode of thinking capable of effecting change, be it within the academy or beyond it, ebbs away. This is a significant part of the backdrop against which ‘post-queer’ comes into being. Yet ‘post-queer’ does not just react to the quarrels that play out within the field of queer theory. It arises too in response to changes in social organization occurring in the western world in the new millennium, particularly those brought about by globalization and the growing power of internet technologies, and it reflects a perception that the discursive environment relating to minority sexualities has significantly altered. In some quarters, it is also seen as a product of a neo-liberalism which has been able to take root in American culture after the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001. Yet however it may be ideologically measured, the essential quality of ‘post-queer’ is that it marks a break (and a need for a break) from the American queer theory that had gone before it, as is explained in a volume of Contemporary French and Francophone Studies devoted to exploring what relevance and resonance (if any) the concept has in a (mostly) French context: As these introductory words make clear, no fixed determination of what ‘post-queer’ is (or even what exactly it does) yet exists; indeed the validity of the term or the concepts attached to it may yet be questioned. In what follows I therefore do not intend to attempt to define what is meant by this neologism; rather, my goal will be to trace the outlines of some of its avatars and discuss their relation to French thought and theorizations of the queer. The ready access to the internet now enjoyed by large proportions of the population in the United States and Western Europe has allowed for the generation of online communities which allow queer activists, gays, lesbian and trans people to come into easy contact with like-minded citizens without needing to enter into the public arena, and without being obstructed by the difficulties of overcoming geographical and other forms of isolation. In the past, the need to negotiate such hurdles was a defining feature of the gay, lesbian and trans experience—hence the late Lawrence R. Schehr’s use of the term ‘novels of arrival’ in his study of inscriptions of male sexuality in twenty-first-century French culture to describe the trope in French cultural production of young gay protagonists making long journeys from the provinces to urban gay population centres. By contrast, the twenty-first century, with its promise of transnational instant connec- tions to remote others, is the era in which the experience of citizens of minority sexual identities becomes increasingly defined by the endless potential afforded by their instant connectivity. Post-queer addresses this phenomenon by putting the virtual at the heart of its thinking. The virtual is important to theorists who associate themselves with the Anglo-American post-queer because it brings about changes in what it means to be a subject, and hence what it means to be a queer subject. The virtual has the capacity to profoundly alter the very concept of subjectivity, in at least two different respects. In the first place, the virtual can be understood as a realm of existence opened up by internet technologies, which provide us with a platform that makes it possible to supplement our ‘real’ life with a (potentially quite separate) online life in cyberspace. This virtual, which corresponds to the world of cyberspace, is the one with which Schehr is concerned in his monograph. Noting the life-enriching promise of the virtual, Schehr points out that access to the virtual comes at a price: the price of being ‘plugged-in’ to the network which forms the infrastructural life-blood of the virtual domain. The ‘plugged-in’ subject not only loses the capacity to be anonymous or invisible — by being connected to the network ‘we are all always visible’ (FPM,12)—but also loses the contours of individuation that mark the boundary between one human being and another, and between the human and the machine. The post-queer thus operates, Schehr notes, within the paradigm of the post-human, the space of the cyborg—as theorized by Donna Haraway — and articulations of queer subjectivity are to be elaborated accordingly. For Schehr, this involves, amongst other things, accepting that the very sovereignty of the human subject is compromised: ‘we are always, in the sense of the film The Matrix, simulacra of the nineteenth-century subject, but free no longer’ (FPM, 12). As a result, in Schehr’s analysis, exploring post-queer subjectivity requires attentive examination of the various networks in which subjects whose desire is directed toward the same sex inscribe themselves (the virtual network is only one, even if it is the most significant); it is no longer viable to attempt to consider the individual in isolation from these structures which contribute to enacting his self. Moreover, the implication of Schehr’s vision is that it is no longer possible to think of ‘queer subjects’ in the way that we have been used to: models of subjecthood based on the subject’s interpellation into the symbolic order of discourse (as posited by Lacanian theory) or else its always already subjugated self-formation within the parameters of internalized disciplinary norms (as in the Foucauldian model of subjectivity) no longer speak to the experience of humans who come into being in part through contact with machines, and the virtual others made available to them via connections mediated by machines. Not only this, but Schehr’s conception of a new paradigm of existence which circumscribes the experience of those twenty-first-century citizens who are sexually oriented toward their own sex is predicated on the idea that the regulatory discourses that instilled heteronormativity as a social norm and produced homophobia are evacuated, dead: they no longer shape the perceptions of same-sex desire, which is no longer socially stigmatized. The person experiencing this desire therefore has a wholly different relationship with his or her sexuality, for this concept itself no longer has its categorizing force. In consequence, the political struggle to de-stigmatize and re-signify homosexuality (and the gender and sexuality of other minoritized sexual groups) is obsolescent, with the result that the notion of ‘queer’ such as we know it today becomes meaningless: In Schehr’s work ‘post-queer’ equates to a condition or set of conditions that, as he sees it, define not only the cultural environment inhabited by men in the West in the twenty-first century, but these men themselves. Discussion of the virtual here recalls Jean Baudrillard’s concept of the ‘hyperréel’, and it takes its place centre-stage in Schehr’s analysis as a vital aspect of the environment he describes, for networks and virtual environments play a critical formative role in the constitution of selfhood and desire, as well as a crucial role in extending the parameters of lived experience (including virtually lived experience).However, elsewhere we can find the virtual contributing to the elaboration of the post-queer in a different sense, forcing us to re-conceive subjectivity in another way. We can find ‘post-queer’ articulated not as a condition, but as a theory; in this theory, we will find that the virtual does not correlate to cyberspace, and is no longer an environment that produces post-queer subjects; rather, it connotes a direction of travel, standing as a domain in which the potential of a yet-to-be-realized future stands waiting to be unlocked for the benefit of the present, as well as the future. This is the post-queer as theorized by David Ruffolo, and it is to this understanding of the post-queer that I shall now turn. Ruffolo provides a sustained critique of first-wave American queer theory in order to explain what has driven him to develop his concept of the post-queer. Amongst his most significant criticisms, he cites what he considers queer theory’s limiting habit of focussing on the dyad of heteronormativity and queer, which for him is unproductive. Moreover, he resoundingly rejects queer theory’s insistence on following Foucault and Butler and conceiving of the (non-heterosexual) subject as being discursively produced through language, disagreeing with the priority that is given to the signifying system in such theorizations. Instead, Ruffolo draws very extensively on the philosophy of Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari in an attempt to devise a theory that will release the potential of the queer body (and indeed other — non-corporeal — bodies besides), for he finds this has been insufficiently accounted for in existing queer theories. To this end, he opts to side-step the question of subjectivity and its relation to the signifying systems or discourses which bring it into a confined state of being, adopting instead a Deleuzian approach that looks past the subject in favour of a focus on life, in particular its quality of being in a perpetual state of ‘becoming’ (P-QP, 6–7). Accordingly, the familiar concern for the subject in queer theory is replaced in Ruffolo’s post- queer theory with an engagement with the body (not necessarily only the human body) as an agent of transformation and the site of potential: [A] post-queer politics of dialogical-becomings is less interested in, for example, what bodies are (what seems to have consumed poststructural theorizations over the past few decades) and more concerned with what they can do. I am referring to the critical and necessary shift from being to becoming—one that offers an important political philosophy for contemporary queer studies to consider the flows and connections of life rather than how life is represented in and through meaning structures such as language (P-QP, 42). Extending his concept of the body to include bodies of knowledge, institutional bodies and cultural bodies (amongst others), Ruffolo conceives of bodies as having the capacity to make connections between themselves in the way of Deleuzian ‘[d]esiring machines [which] are comprised of breaks and flows where movement is a process of becoming rather than a site of re/signification’.The connections being made are ‘rhizomatic’—that is, ungoverned by any sense of hierarchy or order. As such they are both unpredictable and have the power to effect change, since they participate in the evolution of the organism, in its becoming what it previously was not. It is from this conceptualization of the body that Ruffolo derives his conception of its endless potential for (self-)transformation. Since his concept of the body extends so far beyond the human body, his theoretical approach allows him to take as the object of his scrutiny all manner of bodies that operate in society to control human bodies, both those that experience same-sex desire and those that do not. In this way, Ruffolo expands his critical horizons beyond the concerns of sexual minorities in relation to their lived experience of their sexuality, seeking to participate in a Deleuzian ‘political philosophy that is useful in rethinking life itself’ (P-QP, 93). The discussions Ruffolo undertakes in his monograph are intended to indicate how the development of a post-queer philosophy enables post-queer thinking to embrace broader concerns relating to democracy, capitalism and globalization. This approach speaks to the appetite apparent in contemporary American queer theory for exiting a closed circle created by what have come to be often negatively cast as narrow identitarian concerns, in favour of engaging instead with broader issues, particularly those arising out of globalization (such as human trafficking), which may impact particularly on non-heterosexuals, but not solely. This move to extend the parameters of queer inquiry comes in the wake of the terrorist attacks of 11 September, after which US-based queer theorists felt the need to ask themselves questions such as, ‘What does queer studies have to say about empire, globalization, neoliberalism, sovereignty, and terrorism? What does queer studies tell us about immigration, citizenship, prisons, welfare, mourning, and human rights?’ (WQ, 2). Just as it did for Schehr, the virtual plays a pivotal role in Ruffolo’s vision of the post-queer. However, on this occasion the virtual is not to be understood as an ‘alternative reality’, but rather in its Deleuzian sense as ‘the realm of the potential’ (P-QC, 384, emphasis Ruffolo’s). The philosophical realm of the virtual that emerges from the theories of Deleuze and Guattari to drive Ruffolo’s conception of the post- queer is defined principally by being future-directed. Unconcerned with signifying systems, semiotics or the concept of representation, and without the consequent need to untangle anteriorities — this impulse, in Ruffolo’s view, dogs any linguistics-based post-structuralist theory (including Foucauldian theory)—the Deleuzian virtual is pregnant always with the unrealized potential that is intrinsic to life-forms, a potential unknowable in advance. What unlocks this potential is the process of ‘actualization’, which follows from movement, or, to gloss it in Deleuzian terms, ‘becoming-other’. This virtual, in other words, supplies the basis on which Ruffolo is able to refer to his post-queer philosophy as one concerned with becoming rather than being. This distinction is crucial for Ruffolo, for it enables him to insist on a productive difference between his post-queer theory, characterized as forward-looking, and the queer theories that have come before. These he considers to be unproductive and limited, not least because, as he sees it, they deal only in possibility (in other words, that which can be envisaged) and not in potentiality (that is, that which cannot be envisaged or predicted). Ruffolo’s work can thus be seen to channel anew (and indeed offer a theoretical grounding for) the enthusiastic optimism which Donald E. Hall expressed for queer theory in his 2003 guide to this body of thought. Whilst convinced that ‘our current sexual “selves”, norms, and notions are not simply going to go away’, Hall affirms: ‘we must remember always that they are changing, slowly and inevitably, most obviously because everything does change over time, as the history of “sexuality” itself demonstrates’. Post-Queer Lost in Translation? It is clear what debt these North American formulations of post-queer owe to French thought. Ruffolo’s work stands in dialogue with the thought of Foucault as much as the Foucauldian Butler, and we have seen that his theorization of post-queer itself is heavily dependent on the philosophy developed by Deleuze and Guattari, especially in the two volumes of Capitalism and Schizophrenia. Meanwhile, Schehr fashions his concept of the post-queer out of diverse intellectual influences, and while not all of these are French (as evidenced by the discussion of cyborgs alluded to above), the presence of French thought within the volume is nevertheless strong. Like Ruffolo (albeit less single-mindedly), Schehr draws on Deleuze and Guattari as he discusses networks, plug-ins and rhizomatic connections, while elsewhere his discussion is filtered through the ideas of thinkers such as Foucault, Jacques Lacan, and—as we have seen—Baudrillard. In thinking the post-queer, Schehr and Ruffolo thus emulate the intellectual journeys of so many first-wave American queer theorists, such that their work too becomes deeply infused with French thought. The question is, how far are these continuing intellectual peregrinations by American queer theorists mirrored in contemporary French thought on sexuality? To what extent might the concept of ‘post-queer’, rooted in French thought but formulated in North America, be productive in a French context? When considering the possible influence of North American conceptualizations of the post-queer on contemporary French queer theorizations, it may seem self-evident to conclude that there can be none. After all, as we have seen, post-queer marks an attempt to branch out beyond the terrain staked out by queer theorists before the close of the twentieth century, and by Butler in particular. Yet in France, as is well-recognized, translations of the seminal texts produced by these theorists have been very slow to appear (Gender Trouble was first published in French translation as late as 2005, as Trouble dans le genre: pour un féminisme de la subversion; the translation of Sedgwick’s Epistemology of the Closet appeared only in 2008). If France has yet to have had the chance to fully digest the first wave of American queer theory, how could it be ripe for American theorizations of the post- queer? However, to advance a judgement framed in such terms on the French readiness to accommodate an American concept of post-queer would be to fall prey to some misguided assumptions. Firstly, to conclude that a more thorough absorption of that American queer theory of the 1990s would be a pre-requisite for France’s engagement with American articulations of the post-queer suggests almost an inevitability to the migration of queer thought across the Atlantic to France, as if post-queer would follow queer in returning to the land of so many of its intellectual origins, just as night follows day. Yet post-queer does not follow queer, not in any straightforwardly temporal sense, at least. For Ruffolo, the term ‘post-queer’ has no connection with temporality whatsoever, and therefore should not be seen as sequentially following anything: ‘my explicit intention [is] to avoid a reading of “post-” as a definitive time and space that come after something’ (P-QP, 4), he writes, affirming that, in his use of ‘post-queer’, ‘the “post-” is aimed at creating new flows of production with queer—flows that (...) remain in contact with queer, yet uphold distinct differentiations from queer.’ (P-QP, 6) By contrast, the accounts given by Schehr and in the editors’ introduction to Post-Queer do instil a sense of linear progression into the concept of ‘post-queer’, since in both cases the term is positioned as the successor to an older, more familiar, yet putatively obsolete vocabulary. According to these accounts, ‘the queer revolution that was seen initially as a non-identitarian replacement for “gay” is, by and large, over’ (FPM,14), whilst ‘sexualities have fallen to the wayside’ (FPM, 15). As for “‘homosexuality”’, it is an exhausted concept: its time has come to be dépassé or aufgehoben, and this by something we have named ‘post-queer’: a congeries of discourses, praxes, and representations so far removed from the originary discourses attached to the juridico-legal and the medico-psychiatric realms as to be no longer recognizable. (EI, 4) Whilst these claims do not nullify the entirety of the analyses offered in these recent publications, there are nevertheless evident shortcomings whenever statements which seek to describe the cultural environment pertaining to sexual minorities ‘in the West’, as Schehr puts it (FPM, 14), are cast in such sweeping terms. In the French context, it is far from clear (as I have discussed elsewhere) that such an optimistic view of the situation of sexual minorities is warranted. Indeed, Bourcier urges great caution before applying the term ‘post-queer’ to France, pointing out, importantly, that there are ‘inherent risks in the rhetoric of post- and more particularly of post-queer’, a theme which she develops in the rest of her piece by dissecting ‘the potentially anti- queer aspects of “post-queer”’ The certainty with which proclamations are made of the extinction of homophobic discourses throughout ‘the West’ is admittedly the weakest point of the analyses given by Schehr and the editors of Post-Queer. It is also true that, importantly, their concept of post-queer clearly responds to a set of changes occurring in the twenty-first century environment that can—unlike the extinction of homosexuality as a stigmatized category—be uncontroversially registered. However, this problem points us to a further reason why the concept of post-queer, as formulated in North America, may well not quickly or easily travel to France: once again, there is a problem of translation — albeit not a problem that professional linguists or publishers might resolve. This time, it is in conceptual translation that difficulties lie. Post-Queer Unmade in France I have already suggested that certain concepts underlying the contemporary development of post-queer thought in North America do not apply equally on the other side of the Atlantic, and specifically not in France. Where a different relation exists to the category of sexuality, as well as a different relation to the discipline (if I may use the term) of queer theory, it is unsurprising if theories and approaches which are steeped in quite specific local conditions (from the North American reception of Butlerian queer theory to the post-9/11 rise of neo-liberalism), and which address perplexing questions that dominate their domestic context, do not offer exactly the same promise once exported to a country where the debates and priorities respond to rather different environmental cues. This phenomenon is apparent already in the reception of Butler’s early work in France, which has received criticism for—amongst other things, and doubtless somewhat unfairly—failing to address the problem that French republican universalist values pose for queer theorists and activists, and failing to address the postcolonial dimension to debates around queer in France.  Such critiques serve to remind us, should we need reminding, of the importance of French republican universalist paradigms for any debate or theorization of queer in France. This is an area which has received much attention within Anglophone French studies, but whilst there have been numerous accounts of the very particular implications of the republican system and its anti-communitarian stance for the status of France’s queer citizens and the way they articulate their demands vis-à-vis the state (and the way these demands are received), there has been rather less consideration of what this implies methodologically for queer theory (and queer theorizing). The key problem which an academic queer theory that will speak to the contemporary concerns of French queer citizens must address is the question of how to deal with difference. By this I do not mean the cultural difference that separates one society from another. Difference—and its opposite, indifference—are at the heart of the struggle faced by sexual minorities in France, who are pitted against the logic of French republicanism whenever they stake claims for equal civil rights. They face the conundrum of how to articulate their claims to a French state that, upholding a universalist concept of the citizen, refuses in principle to recognize differences that separate citizens from one another — yet, at the same time (even post-PaCS), breaches this principle of equality for all by failing to confer on citizens belonging to sexual minorities the same rights enjoyed by their heterosexual counterparts. Consequently, France’s queer citizens are forced to confront not only inequality, but the edifice of ‘Frenchness’, as sexuality, difference and national identity commingle in France in a highly distinctive way. One drawback, from a French point of view, with the Deleuzian- inflected post-queer theory that has emerged from the other side of the Atlantic is that it does not satisfactorily deal with difference. Discussing the connections (erotic or otherwise) made between bodies in terms of a traffic between ‘desiring machines’ obscures any individual characteristic pertaining to any of those bodies, leaving no room to register inequalities that may impact on those bodies due to material differences in class, colour or religion (for example). Indeed, avoiding difference would seem to be a deliberate strategy in this work, a way of avoiding what is characterized there (as I noted above) as the sterility of an outdated identitarianism. However, this kind of identitarianism is not present in France, for it involves individuals defining their identity primarily in terms of a sexual category, whereas in France, as Scott Gunther points out, ‘the a priori existence of sexual categories (...) is far from axiomatic’. Sexuality (including heterosexuality) belongs, according to French republican discourse, to the private sphere, and in consequence ‘the French rhetoric of universalism has stymied French homosexuals from mobilizing politically around sexual identities’ (EC, 2). As a result, French citizens of queer sexuality project their identity differently in different circumstances, according to whether or not they find themselves ‘in private’. So French queer identity can be said to be marked, to an extent, by self-difference. This analysis of how French people belonging to sexual minorities construct their identities concurs with that of Denis Provencher, who argues that homosexually-oriented French men will articulate their sexual orientation using a language he calls ‘queer French’, which represents a linguistic practice apparent already in the richly homoerotic prose of Jean Genet. This involves avoiding the expression of sexuality in terms of an identity (being something), and instead referring to practices (doing something). Such usage conforms with the demands French universalist republicanism makes on how its citizens express their identity. Importantly, however, it also enables the expression of ‘a more traditional queer French identity that attempts to resist Anglo-American models of gay identity’. Once again, the importance of difference is underscored, but it is not only a matter of self-difference here. What is at stake too is asserting a difference between a specifically French mode of living out one’s sexual orientation, and a globalized, neo-liberal American model of sexuality, typically referred to as ‘global gay’. When North American post-queer theory travels to France, then, it arrives at the intersection of these rival conceptions of sexuality and sexual identity. For that reason too, we may expect French queer theory to be wary of automatically importing its ideas—not least when they involve deploying the thought of philosophers like Deleuze and Guattari, whose work had in any case started to be exploited within French queer theory some years ago. As a result, we may expect French queer theory to continue to resist being merely a grateful consumer of queer theories originating on the other side of the Atlantic, but to develop a different relationship with them. Under the terms of this relationship, theorizations of queer produced in France may, rather than merely ingesting American (post-)queer theory, hold up a usefully critical mirror to it—thus creating the potential for a two-way Atlantic traffic in specifically queer thinking. Arguably, this productive act of reflection is what occurs if we read Maxime Cervulle and Nick Rees-Roberts’s Homo exoticus: race, classe et critique queer in dialogue with the Deleuzian formulations of post-queer that I have been discussing. Cervulle and Rees-Roberts argue that queer theory and critique — on both sides of the Atlantic — have so far failed adequately to interrogate the intersections of queer sexuality and ethnicity in France, and in particular the white privilege that follows from these. This urgently needs to be corrected: ‘one of the crucial challenges for LGBTQ cultures today is for gay, lesbian and trans people of colour to call into question a hegemonic identity based on the North American model’ (HE, 18). They contend that an exoticizing tendency exists in the French gay erotic imaginary, which leads to gay male sexuality in France being characteristically constructed around colonial paradigms which have the effect of ‘othering’, and thereby silencing, those belonging to non-white ethnic minorities. Significantly, they see this imposition of difference in French gay culture as the product of what we might call a failure to deal with another kind of difference—that is, the difference which must be silenced in order to conform to French republican ideology. They conclude that French gay men resort to the homonormative strategy of ‘manufacturing exotic figures the better to reconstruct a white gay subject all ready to assimilate’ (HE, 18) with the aim of achieving acceptance for a privileged subset of gay citizens into the French republican model—this at the cost of exacerbating the inequalities experienced by non-white gay French citizens, and exacerbating the very social fragmentation that the principles of universalist republicanism are supposed to prevent. Cervulle and Rees-Roberts’s study thus makes a powerful case for incorporating the thinking of difference within any queer theory that now seeks to address itself to the French population. Showing up the ramifications of indifference to difference for France’s sexual (and other) minorities, and for the country as a whole, they may also — if their work travels that far — alert queer theorists on the other side of the Atlantic to a potential ethical blindspot within their own thinking. Rosemary Auchmuty has emphasized the risk of trying to define what is meant by feminism – that inevitably in attempting to pin it down one loses as many supporters as opponents (2003: 377, footnote 1). Nonetheless, it is fair to say that the feminist project is often understood as both descriptive and normative: it takes women to have experienced discrimination on the basis of sex, gender and/or sexuality; and it applies a gendered analysis to what are largely understood as gender neutral legal and social arrangements, in order to improve the lives of women (Conaghan 2000). However, the key concepts of sex, gender and sexuality that feminists have employed as frameworks or tools for analysis of inequality have been the subject of much debate and disagreement. The way in which sex, gender and sexuality – and even the term ‘woman’ itself – have been conceptualized by feminists is the subject of this chapter. I will trace the course of the debates over the meaning and significance of sex, gender and sexuality to feminist theorizing. In doing so, the intention is not to summarize the work of every feminist theorist who has offered an analysis of these key concepts, but rather to identify themes that have arisen as feminist theorizing has evolved. Thus, what follows is not a linear inquiry, but rather a thematic analysis, or ‘history of ideas’, of those who have contributed to feminist debates on sexuality, sex and gender. In so doing, I hope to demonstrate that shifts in thinking are ‘connected and overlapping’ rather than ‘purely ... action leading to acrimonious reaction’ (Garber 2006: 82).The chapter focuses largely on Western feminist thinking, and in particular Anglo-American feminist legal theory, although some contributions of theorists from continental Europe are taken into account. What we will see is that although gender, sex and sexuality have been analysed as discrete concepts, they have also been conceptualized as interwoven and interdependent. Writers from different traditions and theoretical backgrounds have taken distinctly different views on the conceptual relationship between gender, sex and sexuality; this chapter aims to show how these views developed and the tensions and moments of connection that exist across these debates. Beginning with ‘second wave’ feminism, the chapter will offer an overview of key moments in the sex/gender and sexuality debates. In so doing, it will look at the contributions not only of feminists to these conversations, but also the interventions offered by queer theorists and others, acknowledging, of course, that often work is not easily classifiable as falling into one or other field(s) and that there are many commonalities and intersections between different theoretical positions (Richardson 2006). Sex , Gender and Sexuality: ‘Second Wave’ Feminism Sex and Gender Sex and gender have been the bedrocks of feminist thinking since what has been termed the ‘first wave’ of feminism in the late nineteenth to early twentieth century. As explored by Elsje Bonthuys in this volume, first wave – that is, liberal – feminists claimed that women were discriminated against on the basis of their sex (where sex was understood to mean what we would now call biological sex, as well as those characteristics thought to arise ‘naturally’ as a result of sexual differences between men and women, such as temperament, physical capacities and so on). The proposition that women should have equal access to education and to public life more generally – was a key contribution of first wave feminist activism and theorizing, and was the foundation of campaigns for women’s right to suffrage, and equal access to ownership of property and higher education. It was not suggested that women were the same as men; rather women should have the same rights to public life that men enjoyed. However, ‘second wave’ feminism brought with it a move to distinguish between sex and ‘gender’ (Oakley 1972, Kessler and McKenna 1978). The distinction, first developed in 1968 by the psychoanalyst Robert Stoller, was utilized as a way of describing the development of gender identity – ‘sex roles’ – as independent from physiology (Eisenstein 1983: 7). Feminists employed the distinction in a more critical way to argue against conventional sex roles, emphasizing the sex/gender opposition as a way of demonstrating that while physiological sex might be innate, gender differences between men and women (that is, femininity and masculinity), which were commonly thought to be  ‘natural’ and inescapable, and which provided the basis for differential treatment of men and women, are socially constructed. This gave feminists a way of understanding and theorizing gender as a culturally inscribed practice rather than an inherent trait. Sex might be taken to be biological and therefore determined, but the parameters and content of appropriate gender roles could now be legally and politically challenged. Building on this, second wave feminist legal theorists began to develop critiques of the law as gendered – that is, male oriented – not only in its formal exclusion of women on the basis of their biological sex (historically as lawyers, as judges, from the vote, and so on) but also in its substance. Because our social world is gendered, they argued, the very culture of the law is also gendered, not only in its concepts and substantive rules (see, for example, MacKinnon’s 1989 argument about the honest belief rule in rape) but also with respect to legal methods, such as defining relevance, and legal reasoning (Mossman 1987). Second wave feminism challenged discrimination on the basis of gender, and brought a focus on issues such as marriage, employment, reproduction, sexual violence and harassment, prostitution and pornography. But the fundamental problem for feminists at this time was the legal and social construction of gender, and the oppression of women’s sexualities.Gender and SexualitySecond wave feminists began to theorize sexuality as a core part of the patriarchal oppression of women; as such, gender and sexuality had to be theorized together. Like gender, sexuality was understood to be socially produced – a ‘social rather than natural’ occurrence (Jackson 2006: 38). According to this view, both sexuality and gender emerge not through benign social processes but through the power of male dominance. Radical feminists, such as MacKinnon for instance, argued that categories of difference which are taken as given (such as gender) are often instituted through an exercise of power which leaves some (that is, women) in a less advantaged and more oppressed situation than those who benefit from the existence of such categories (that is, men); and that the division of individuals into categories may itself be the constitution or creation of difference rather than the recognition of ‘real’ difference (MacKinnon 1989: 237, Spelman 1988: 150). MacKinnon’s work, which was paradigmatic of this era, suggested that women’s sexualities are completely defined and dominated by male sexual culture, a position referred to by Halley (2008: 41) as ‘power feminism’. Women’s sexuality is culturally prescribed and controlled by the (male) state by various social and legal means, through the ‘seamless web of life and law’ (MacKinnon 1989: 241). MacKinnon’s early theories, which wove a unique tapestry of feminism and Marxism, were particularly influential in this regard, as she claimed that ‘[s]exuality is to feminism what work is to Marxism – that which is most one’s own, yet most taken away’ (1989: 3). She also made an explicit link between the construction of gender and the construction of sexuality: Sexuality, then, is a form of power. Gender, as socially constructed, embodies it, not the reverse. Women and men are divided by gender, made into the sexes as we know them, by the social requirements of its dominant form, heterosexuality, which institutionalizes male sexual dominance and female sexual submission. If this is true, sexuality is the lynchpin of gender inequality. (1989: 113) Gender is therefore a product of the way in which sexuality is constructed by and through social relations – it is a result of patriarchal oppression of women’s sexuality. As we will see shortly, in some respects this echoes the approach taken by other social theorists, such as Michel Foucault; while he did not theorize gender oppression as such, for Foucault, sex itself was produced by discourses of sexuality. For both these approaches then, it is sexuality that plays the most crucial role in grounding our legal and social conceptions of sex and gender. Other radical feminists, such as writer Andrea Dworkin (1981), also argued that the sexuality women experience is not their own but that which is fantasized by men; their fantasies (such as rape and pornography) become our reality. Pornography is therefore not only the eroticization of the domination/submission relationship that exists between all men and women, but also a ‘means through which sexuality is socially constructed, a site of construction, a domain of exercise’ (MacKinnon 1989: 134). Despite Dworkin and MacKinnon’s imaginative attempts to harness the law to change women’s lives by regulating pornography through the civil law, their approach to the issue of women’s sexualities has been critiqued as over-determinant in its totalism of the cultural effects of power, and underplaying women’s agency (Brown 1995: 89, Smart 1989: 77). MacKinnon’s work in particular has been said to under-theorize, homogenize and generally denigrate both male (homo)sexuality and women’s heterosexual desire (Stychin 1995: 62, Halley 2008: 65, compare Richardson 1996); and to ignore the institutionally powerful and often negative impact of law upon feminist projects (Brown 1995: 131, Halley 2008: 57). Angela Harris (1990) submitted a powerful critique of the work of MacKinnon, and that of the radical feminist Robin West, as demonstrating a ‘gender essentialism’ that elided race, and class amongst other things. MacKinnon’s thesis also did not seem to take into account, in any meaningful way, the construction of lesbian sexuality. However, a distinct lesbian feminist analysis of gender and sexuality did begin to emerge during the second wave. Lesbian feminists challenged mainstream feminist legal theory as being inherently heterosexual in its erasure of lesbian sexuality (Cain 1990), arguing that women’s sexualities were overshadowed by the cultural, legal and political institution of heterosexuality, and the status of being a lesbian was believed to be the antithesis of heterosexuality. Adopting the identity of a ‘woman-identified-woman’ was perceived as the political solution, whether or not women chose to express this identity in a sexualized way (Eisenstein 1983: 53–54). Embracing this approach, in 1980, Adrienne Rich published a ‘landmark essay’ (Fuss 1989: 47) entitled ‘Compulsory Heterosexuality and Lesbian Existence’ in which she argued that much feminist scholarship assumed female heterosexuality and ignored lesbian existence (1983: 178–182), thereby also neglecting the reality that heterosexuality is, by a variety of means, ‘forcibly and subliminally imposed on women’ (1983: 195). Rich argued that compulsory heterosexuality also serves to ensure the invisibility or at least deviant status of lesbian experience in the social world (1983: 185, 191). Unlike MacKinnon, however, Rich does not overstate male power, or share her view of the inevitability of male (heterosexual) culture’s impact upon women; Rich attempts to describe the many ways throughout history in which women have evaded heterosexuality: ‘everywhere women have resisted it, often at the cost of physical torture, imprisonment, psychosurgery, social ostracism and extreme poverty’ (1983: 195– 196). Rich claimed that all women’s authentic sexualities and experiences appear on a ‘lesbian continuum’ such that each woman has a range of ‘Woman-identified experiences’ throughout her lifetime, experiences that are not confined to genital sexual contact between women (1983: 192) and that are undermined by the institutions of heterosexuality (1983: 201), institutions which in turn are maintained through both physical violence and psychological control or ‘false consciousness’ (1983: 192). The aim then is to challenge the ‘lie’ of compulsory heterosexuality (199). For Rich and other lesbian feminist theorists, it is the coercive imposition of heterosexuality that produces gender; but while heterosexuality is understood as socially enacted, lesbianism is implied as a possibility that exists innately in all women (Jackson 2006: 46). This kind of lesbian feminist theory has been critiqued as essentialist and ahistorical in its portrayal of a fundamental and authentic lesbianism which is different to, and oppressed by, compulsory (male) heterosexuality. Furthermore, in its adherence to the gender binary, Rich’s work distinguishes what it means to be lesbian from the gay male experience; Diana Fuss critiques Rich as ‘curiously unable to theorize male homosexuality outside of its popular negative stereotypes’ (Fuss 1989: 47). However, Cheshire Calhoun suggests that this reading back into history the existence of lesbian identities provides a ‘useful essentialist fiction’ in that it demonstrates that there is nothing natural about the way in which our contemporary heterosexual ‘law’ (both formal and informal) is constructed, and reveals the way in which women over time have broken heterosexual and patriarchal law (1993: 1872–1874). Rich’s redefinition of lesbian experience was certainly controversial (Eisenstein 1983: 56), and fundamentally challenged the heterosexual assumptions of mainstream feminism, as well as medical conceptions of lesbian sexuality, and fostered heterogeneity in the movement (Stein 1992: 39). However, as will be explored further below, and unlike later feminist and queer theoretical engagements with law, the analyses of key feminists such as Rich and MacKinnon have been said to wrongly prioritize sexuality as the primary site of oppression (Jackson 2006: 46–47). Over-privileging sexuality as the site of women’s oppression, and therefore as the cornerstone of feminist analyses, is said to neglect other aspects of gender inequality (non-sexual social practices of heterosexuality) such as labour (Jackson 2006: 46). Stevi Jackson, for example, has argued that although the two are empirically interrelated, gender should be prioritized since logically it precedes sexuality, and is a binarised, hierarchical practice of social division, which, like class, is structurally ‘embedded in both social institutions and social practices’ (2006: 41).  The ‘sexuality as constitutive of gender’ theorists have also been accused of neglecting the ways in which sexuality and gender could usefully be analysed separately, and how sexual oppression could be said to be a site of power/resistance outwith the confines of its relationship to gender oppression. For example, Gayle Rubin argued in 1984 in her influential article ‘Thinking Sex’ for ‘a radical separation of gender and sexuality’ (McLaughlin et al 2006: 1). Indeed, Rubin has been credited with having ‘shaped the field of sexuality studies’ (Stryker 2011: 82). Having first coined the term ‘sex/gender system’ in 1975 to describe the processes by which women are caught in a nexus of expectations and constraints by way of both nature (biology) and culture (socialization), Rubin went on to critique the hegemonic, conservative ‘orthodoxy’ of feminist work on sexuality (Richardson 2006: 25). Rubin categorized the work of anti-pornography radical feminists (such as MacKinnon) as ‘sex–negative’, and in direct contrast to her own ‘sex-positive’ analysis of the systematic exclusion of non-normative sexualities and sexual practices. During the ‘sex wars’ of the 1980s, when feminists most vehemently disagreed over crucial issues such as pornography, prostitution and sadomasochism, debates around the appropriate regulation of sexuality became heated and divisive, and Rubin, along with other feminists such as Carole Vance, Pat Califia and Joan Nestle undertook critical engagement with radical feminist perspectives, the result of which was a movement cleaved into two distinct camps (Rubin 2011, Vance 1984). As Susan Ardill and Sue O’Sullivan recall (2005: 109), you were either for sexual liberation or for women’s liberation, you could not be for both. Although criticized as going ‘too far in denying the empirical connections between gender and sexuality’ (Jackson 2006: 47), Rubin’s contribution was important in grounding later ‘queer’ and postmodern feminist work, discussed below, that argued for the analysis of sexuality that was not necessarily grounded in feminist theory (see also Halley 2008). Likewise, the work of Eve Kofoski Sedgwick foregrounded the development of queer perspectives on the particularity of sexuality as discrete from gender studies: ‘the whole realm of what modern culture refers to as “sexuality” and also calls “sex”... is virtually impossible to situate on a map delimited by the feminist defined sex/gender distinction” (Sedgwick 1990: 29). Notwithstanding the work of Rubin and others, aimed at undermining mainstream feminist orthodoxies, much of feminist work at this time was largely focused on sexuality as the dominant and oppressive force in women’s lives. Rich’s focus on (hetero)sexuality as the primary site of oppression and her suggestion that all women are potentially lesbians was said to over-generalize and elide differences among those women/lesbians, including differences of class and race (Fuss 1989: 44, Harris 1990). This charge – universalism – has also been made, as noted above, against other radical feminists including MacKinnon and Dworkin, and is based on the tendency of such feminist arguments to assume a universal experience of sexuality and gender without accounting for the ways in which women’s experiences are mediated through other ‘identity markers’ such as race, class, disability, religion and so on. However, as we will see shortly, the central question of sexual difference continued to preoccupy many feminists for some time to come. Emphasizing or Eradicating Sexual Difference? Sexual Difference Feminism: Luce Irigaray MacKinnon’s ‘power feminism’ (Halley 2008: 41) sees sexuality, and thereby gender differences, as constructed by and through male oppression, a view that Halley describes as ‘a dark vision of wall to wall domination’ (2008: 72). At the same time, however, another strand of ‘second wave’ feminism stresses the importance of sexual difference between men and women, arguing that women’s accounts and experiences of the world have been repressed, ignored or devalued, and that more attention must be paid to this fundamental sexual difference, both in law and in the social world more generally. The problems of recognizing and naming female sexuality in particular are discussed at length by the Belgian feminist, Luce Irigaray. Strongly influenced by (and critical of) psychoanalytic theories, particularly those of Lacan and Freud, Irigaray critiques the existing system of ‘patriarchal law’ (1994: 14–18), and develops the idea of a ‘civil law for women’ (19–63, 67–87), that includes ‘a civil offence to depict women’s bodies as stakes in pornography or prostitution’ (75). This will allow women, among other things, the right to human dignity, including ‘an end to commercial use of their bodies or images’ (Irigaray 1994: 60). For Irigaray, politics and social change must be based on the recognition that women and men are fundamentally different: The legal system, then, must be grounded in sexual difference, and rights and obligations must be rewritten to reflect this (1993: 13); the current system does not promote equality because it does not take sexual difference into account (1993: 84). The oppression of women through law and other social and cultural forces is an important issue but legal change must be accompanied by changes to our ‘symbolic codes’ such as language and religion (1994: 112), particularly the former since ‘the organisation of the law reflects that of the language and vice versa’ (1994: 41). Language for Irigaray is sexed and is ‘neither universal nor neutral’ (1993: 30), but has a sexuality that is male-defined and reflects male desire (1994: 32–33); women therefore lack the ability to speak, think, desire or imagine for themselves (1985a: 224). Language is to Irigaray what law is to MacKinnon: apparently neutral but inherently male, and a dominant force in the construction of women’s sexuality. Irigaray argues that within a masculinist linguistic system, the feminine is altogether excluded: women are unrepresentable and unthinkable, comprehensible only within male terms (Butler 1990: 9). To define female sexuality, to try to discover and give voice to female sexuality within the existing language system would be dangerous. Irigaray would rather resist a definition of female sexuality within this system; to do so would be to ‘speak like men’ (1985a: 78). Any practical gains that women have made this century have been due to their ability to take on a kind of male identity and to make themselves as much like men as possible (Irigaray 1994: 79). For Irigaray, this is not equality. In emphasizing the value of all that is feminine, Irigaray can be described as what Halley calls a ‘cultural feminist’ (2008: 58–59). In her call for a distinct female voice and language, she is ‘trying to “imagine the unimaginable’ (Whitford 1991: 22). While MacKinnon believes that women are portrayed as different to men, and that this difference is not only culturally constructed but is the bedrock of inequality and male dominance, the very point of Irigaray’s work is to demonstrate the ways in which discourse ‘sames’ women – that is, makes them the mirror image of men – hence Irigaray’s call for the creation of a language for women, in order that they might speak and be heard, and be recognized as distinctly female subjects. In this view of the world, woman is not ‘other’ as part of a symmetrical binary system which privileges the first term (for example, subject/object or masculine/feminine), but is what Braidotti calls ‘radically and positively other’ (1994: 121). Since Irigaray’s analysis appears to rest on a binary model of two-sexed sexual difference, it has been argued that her concentration on sexed difference operates to demote other differences such as race,ethnicity or sexuality (Davies 1997: 43, Lacey 1997: 70). Margaret Davies suggests that although Irigaray’s gesture may be ‘strategically useful’ it is not necessarily ‘a solution’ since ‘two sexes are, in any case, as oppressive to those who do not simply identify with one sex or the other or whose identifications do not fit their bodies, in the same way that the archetypal legal man is, broadly speaking, oppressive to women’ (Davies 1997: 44). Katherine O’Donovan claims that the value of Irigaray’s work is rhetorical rather than definitional (1997: 52), but according to Nicola Lacey, even as a rhetorical strategy it is not sufficiently reflexive and can be read as essentialist rather than transformative (1997: 69, 71). This is because Irigaray’s specific recommendations may echo ahistorical stereotypical notions of the feminine and ‘resonate with a conception of woman which is uncomfortably close to that of patriarchal social institutions, and which feminism has generally sought to undermine’ (Lacey 1997: 70). Ultimately, however, Irigaray’s work had a fundamental impact on feminism and the sex/gender and sexuality debates. Her belief in the possibility of women’s subjectivity and sexuality, of ‘the positivity of sexual difference’ (Braidotti 1994: 121), has proved to be a major challenge to discourses of law, psychoanalysis, science, linguistics and beyond. On the other hand, feminists wishing to eradicate sexual difference altogether, such as Monique Wittig, have also made a significant contribution to the field.The Rejection of Sexual Difference: Monique WittigRich’s argument that all women could experience lesbianism to various degrees contrasts with that of Monique Wittig, a French materialist feminist theorist claiming a distinctly lesbian perspective, who controversially claimed in 1978 that lesbians were not women, primarily because ‘“woman” has meaning only in heterosexual systems of thought and heterosexual economic systems’ (1992: 32). Analogizing sexuality and class, and echoing the work of Simone De Beauvoir, Wittig argued that women only exist in relation and opposition to men; therefore, lesbians are not women because they do not relate to men ‘economically, politically or ideologically’ (1992: 20; see also Delphy 1970). Both Wittig and Rich question heterosexuality as a political regime, one that is forced upon women though a variety of social and legal means, and which women have internalized. But Wittig resists what she sees as previous lesbian reliance on and celebration of women’s ‘difference’ from men (1992: 10), maintaining that such an approach simply replaces patriarchy with a similarly oppressive matriarchy. Strongly influenced by Marxism, Wittig uses the analogy of class to suggest that the power struggle between men and women should lead to the abolition of the system of sexual difference. Similarly to MacKinnon, she believes that there is nothing ontological about difference, that dominance is not a product of difference. Rather, difference is that which disguises dominance: it is simply the (heterosexual) male interpretation of domination: What is the different/other if not the dominated? For heterosexual society is the society which oppresses not only lesbians and gay men, it oppresses many different/others, it oppresses all women and many categories of men, all those who are in the position of the dominated ... The function of difference is to mask at every level the conflicts of interest, including ideological ones (1992: 29). However, for Wittig, in direct contrast to MacKinnon’s approach, it is gender that produces a binary system of sexuality. And while Irigaray celebrates the possibility of creating a positive femininity and female sexuality, for Wittig ‘the task is ... to displace the binary as such through a specifically lesbian disintegration of its constitutive categories’ (Butler 1990: 126).Concepts such as sex, gender, man and woman all contribute as ‘categories of oppression’ to a heterosexual regime (Wittig 1992: 77). Wittig’s goal is to eradicate the categories of sex and gender so that our language system – and therefore the construction of the subject – becomes gender neutral. Consequently, men and women as such have to disappear ‘politically, economically, ideologically’. If lesbians and gay men describe themselves as men and women, ‘we are instrumental in maintaining heterosexuality’ (1992: 29). The answer for Wittig, then, is not to harden the existing categories through establishing lesbian and gay communities with corresponding legal rights and identities but to destroy these very categories themselves. We must therefore go beyond sex, even so far as ‘rejecting all sciences which still use these categories as their fundamentals (practically all social sciences)’ (1992: 19–20). In Wittig’s view then, there is no escape for women from this heterosexual bind, unless we replace the current social, legal, economic and political system with a completely different alternative, as defined by a lesbian perspective. Such an alternative system would not, however, be predicated on biological asymmetry. Since categories of sex/gender are forced upon us as social realities when in fact they are constructions, the only way to achieve change is to dismantle our discourses on sex and gender and to reconceptualize sex, gender and sexuality without relying on difference, particularly biological difference (Butler 1990: 113). Fuss (1989: 44) suggests that both Wittig’s contention that lesbians are not women, and Rich’s suggestion that in effect all women are (potential) lesbians, are equally unconvincing. Rich’s definition of lesbian is too vague and inclusive, while Wittig’s is too exclusive and reified. Nonetheless, Wittig’s radical, lesbian, social constructionist, materialist philosophy offers a unique perspective on the debate around the meaning of sex, gender and sexuality as well as ‘an experience beyond the categories of identity, an erotic struggle to create new categories from the ruins of the old, new ways of being a body within the cultural field, and whole new languages of description’ (Butler 1990: 127). Post-second wave feminism, however, has begun to more closely interrogate the meaning of sexual difference, as well as the taken-for-grantedness of the biological and legal basis of sex itself. Sex, Gender and Sexuality: After the Second Wave Sex and Sexuality That the sex/gender distinction is now commonly accepted as part of mainstream legal thinking is aptly demonstrated by the following quote from the English Court of Appeal decision in the transgender case Bellinger v Bellinger: The words ‘sex’ and ‘gender’ are sometimes used interchangeably, but today more frequently denote a difference. Mrs. Cox [Mrs. Bellinger’s lawyer] submitted that gender was broader than sex. Her suggested definition was that ‘gender’ related to culturally and socially specific expectations of behaviour and attitude, mapped onto men and women by society. It included self-definition, that is to say, what a person recognised himself to be. ([2002] Fam. 150 at 160) Notwithstanding the proliferation of feminist theorizing around gender and sexuality, the concept of sex has largely, until relatively recently, been left out of the picture. As the sex/gender distinction became ‘mainstreamed’, feminist legal and social theory moved on. Critics began to suggest that the sex/gender distinction implies a questionable biological essentialism and binarism about sex (McNay 1992: 22). Although gender roles and scripts were fundamentally challenged by the separation of sex and gender, the distinction left the body languishing in the ‘natural’ realm of biology. It also linguistically and conceptually separated sex from gender in a way that sits uneasily with many contemporary feminist theorists (McNay 1992: 23). However to explain how this more recent strand of feminist thinking on sex–gender–sexuality has evolved, we must pause to first say a few words about the work of Michel Foucault, which has been enormously influential on subsequent feminist (and other) theories of sex, gender and sexuality.Foucault: The History of SexualityFoucault’s impact on theories positing the construction, as opposed to naturalness, of sex and sexuality, has been widespread and profound. The first volume of his three-volume text The History of Sexuality was published in France in 1976, and translated into English in 1978. Foucault was one of  the first to discuss the way in which sexuality is produced (as is all knowledge) through the exercise of different levels and types of power.Foucault argues that ‘sexuality is the set of effects produced in bodies, behaviours and social relations by a certain deployment deriving from a complex political technology’ (1984: 127). Sexuality is not what we think it is: it is not an inherent or innate drive or orientation which can be repressed by power, or is ‘disobedient’ to a power ‘which exhausts itself trying to subdue it and often fails to control it entirely’ (1984: 103). Sexuality is a production of and through power, a ‘transfer point for relations of power’ (1984: 103). It is a ‘historical construct’ rather than a ‘natural given’ or ‘furtive reality’. The ‘proliferation’ of various discourses and knowledges on sexualities is evident, according to Foucault, within a wide range of fields such as medicine, law and psychiatry (1984: 103). He argues that sexuality became linked with what he calls the ‘bio-politics of the population’, through control of reproduction, marriage, health, morality and so on (1984: 139). Through the crucial notion of ‘bio-power’, Foucault explains how ‘knowledge-power’ has come to affect bodies (1984: 143), such that ‘[P]ower and sexuality are not ontologically distinct, rather sexuality is the result of a productive “biopower” which focuses on human bodies, inciting and extorting various effects’ (McNay 1992: 29). For Foucault, sex is the concept that binds together lots of different elements of our bodies: ‘anatomical elements, biological functions, conduct, sensations, and pleasures, and it enabled one to make use of this fictitious unity as a causal principle, an omnipresent meaning, a secret to be discovered everywhere: sex was thus able to function as a unique signifier and as a universal signified’ (1984: 154). Foucault rejects any distinction between sex as natural and sexuality as construction; rather sex is bound up with the way in which bodies (and therefore the species) are regulated through power. Sex is therefore a ‘regulatory construct’ (McNay 1992: 29). According to Foucault then, not only is sexuality a product of (classed) power relations, but sex is too. Sex does not precede sexuality; rather the reverse is true – the deployment of sexuality is part of the exercise of power that produces sex. Therefore, we cannot say that sex is real and sexuality a construct; rather we must demonstrate that sex is a product of sexuality – ‘sexuality is a very real historical formation; it is what gave rise to the notion of sex’ (1984: 157). Notwithstanding some robust feminist critiques of Foucault’s failure to theorize gender, or women’s inequality (Fuss 1989: 107, McNay 1992: 33–35, Sawicki 1991: 29), some theorists, building on this Foucauldian perspective, have argued that rather than juxtaposing socially produced gender with natural biological sex, we can begin to understand sex itself (the interpretation of bodies) as historically and socially constructed (Laqueur 1990). More than that, sex, or sexed bodies, are produced through discourses about gender and sexuality. For example, as we shall see shortly, Judith Butler applies a Foucauldian analysis to gender in order to show how the concept of gender produces sex – that is, that the practice of seeing only two ways of doing gender produces two biological sexes (see also Hird 2002: 588). These shifts in feminist thinking have been in part brought about by the advent of postmodern and distinctly ‘queer’ perspectives that posit a pluralistic rather than binary system of sex/gender and sexuality. Sexes, Genders and Sexualities Feminism and Queer Theory Notwithstanding Jackson’s claim that ‘it is feminists for whom there is most at stake in emphasizing the connections between gender and sexuality’ (2006: 46), ‘queer’ analyses of sexuality began to emerge in the late 1980s.  The roots of queer theory are in social construction theory (predominantly that of Foucault as described above), feminist theory and post-modernism, particularly the deconstruction of identity and subjectivity. The central theme is a challenge to rigid binaries and categories, and a move away from grand theory in favour of many local interlocking social and legal struggles and theories – or ‘strange affinities’ (Hong and Ferguson 2011). Queer theory as a discrete perspective developed also in answer to some of the critiques of second wave feminism as universalizing (Richardson 2006: 19). Richardson, among others, has argued that queer feminist perspectives on sexuality, particularly that of Butler, were born in part from the insights extended through Rich’s focus on compulsory heterosexuality, and Wittig’s deconstruction of gender (2006: 30, Garber 2006: 84–85). Stychin also attributes the emergence of queer at least partially to the defeat of the civil rights approach, epitomized by the defeat of pro-gay immutability arguments in the 1986 US case of Bowers v Hardwick, which upheld the criminalization of ‘sodomy’ in Georgia; when the assimilationist ‘we are the same’ argument failed so dramatically, some gays and lesbians began to re-appropriate ‘otherness’ (1995: 149, 151). Queer theorists have challenged feminism to take the social constructionism of gender and sexuality one step further, to explore the ways in which all kinds of (elements of) identities, including sex are fractured and ‘contingent’, and to question the binary categories of male and female – that is, the assumption that gender was constructed but somehow sex was not. Queer also poses the possibility of a multiplicity of sexes, genders and sexualities, rather than arguing simply for the destruction sex/gender and sexuality altogether. However, multiplicity does not necessarily mean a wholesale dismissal of identity categories or rights-based claims. As Vanita argues with respect to sexuality-based civil rights claims in India, categories may still be necessary in some contexts despite (and alongside – see Butler 1993: 222 on the ‘double gesture’) the queer rejection of identity politics (2002: 5, cited in Garber 2006: 81). The queer movement has had a significant impact on the theory and practice of sexual politics. Queer theorists have helpfully disaggregated sex/gender in sexuality in a way that allows them to be analysed separately, and thus for sexuality to be the focus of study beyond the question of sex/gender. One theorist who has had a remarkable influence in this area, weaving together elements of feminism, queer theory and a postmodern approach more generally is Judith Butler. Adopting a more fluid and pluralistic account of gender than the binary model of her feminist predecessors, Butler’s central argument is that gender is ‘performed’.Gender, Performance and PerformativitySo how is gender performed? In the same way that ‘woman itself is a term in process ... an ongoing discursive practice’ (1990: 33), gender is not a natural trait but an effect of discourse, and performed in the sense that it is a ‘stylized repetition of acts’ (1990: 140), that ‘congeal over time’ (1990: 33), rather than a concrete stable and immutable identity. Butler describes in detail the way in which gender is a construct, and is ‘performed’:  Because there is neither an “essence” that gender expresses or externalizes nor an objective ideal to which gender aspires, and because gender is not a fact, the various acts of gender create the idea of gender, and without those acts, there would be no gender at all. Gender is, thus, a construction that regularly conceals its genesis; the tacit collective agreement to perform, produce, and sustain discrete and polar genders as cultural fictions is obscured by the credibility of those productions ... the “construction” compels our belief in its necessity and naturalness. (1990: 140)  According to Butler there is no biological pre-existing sex through which gender and sexuality emerge. Rather, ‘gender is a performance that produces the illusion of an inner sex or essence or psychic gender core’ (1991: 28). For her, ‘sex is an ideal construct which is forcibly materialised through time ... thus ... one of the norms by which the “one” becomes viable at all, that which qualifies a body for life within the domain of cultural intelligibility’ (1993: 1–2). Thus, compulsory heterosexuality and its accompanying gender norms produce, as effects, categories of sex and sexuality (1990: 139–140, 1991: 24). Sex and gender are both what she calls ‘regulatory fictions’ (1990: 33). As Butler herself clarified in 1993, performance is not about taking on the garb of a particular elected gender at whichever moment one chooses – in fact it is not really about choice at all, since the range of garments – the language and tools of gender – available to us are already proscribed within society (1993: 187). Butler also explains (echoing Wittig) that without homosexuality, heterosexuality would not exist (Butler 1991: 13). In order to make clear their boundaries, categories must be defined in opposition to (constituted through) something and therefore those opposites are necessary; performativity therefore has normative force through both reiteration, and exclusion (Butler 1993: 188). However, unlike Wittig, Butler does not believe that existing heteronormative concepts of sex and gender can simply be destroyed; only the proliferation or parodying of sex/gender is possible (compare Jeffreys 1994) because there is no possibility of agency ‘outside of the discursive practices that give those terms the intelligibility they have’ (1990: 148, emphasis added). Butler critiques MacKinnon’s conflation of sexuality and gender as ‘highly deterministic’ since it inhibits the theorization of sexuality apart from gender difference, and the study of ‘kinds of sexual regulation that do not take gender as their primary objects’ (1993: 239, see also Halley 2008). On the other hand, Butler argues, it is not desirable to completely separate gender from sexuality (1993: 5). Both feminism and queer theory take sexuality as their primary point of analysis and accept their ‘constitutive inter-relationship’ (1993: 240). In order to bring them closer together, Butler recommends that this ‘opposition’ between sexuality and gender needs to be reconceptualized, as does the complex relationship between sexuality, gender and other fields of power such as race (1990: 240). So, while heterosexuality and gender norms are closely linked, sexuality does not determine gender and vice versa. It is important, therefore, to recognize the importance of gender as distinct from sexuality, but in a way that accepts its centrality to the regulation of sexuality: neither one should be privileged over the other, but we ought to recognize the ‘non-causal and non-reductive connection between sexuality and gender’ (1993: 238). Butler argues here that emerging feminist and queer theories should not focus on whether sex/gender or sexuality is prior, or more important, but rather on the relationship between these concepts. But some feminists have questioned what they see as a universalizing tendency within queer theory/politics that ignores feminist concerns about gender, lesbian sexuality (Walters 1996: 845–846, Jeffreys 1994: 174) and race (Samuels 1999, Ferguson 2004); as well as the content and structure of heterosexuality (Jackson 2006: 39). These deep-seated issues of universalism versus particularity have been especially acute in recent conversations about transgender politics and gender pluralism (Monro 2007), which have also, importantly, posed difficult questions for feminism about what it means to be a woman.‘Next Wave’ Feminism, Transgender Feminism and Gender PluralismContemporary transgender activism and theory dispute the finality and inflexibility of male/female boundaries, and hence categories of sexual orientation (Monro 2007). In Butler's words, ‘[t]here are humans ... who live and breathe in the interstices of this binary relationship, showing that it is not exhaustive; it is not necessary’ (2004: 65). However, feminism and transgender politics have not had an easy relationship. Surya Monro (2007: 125) suggests that this is in part because of an inclination among feminists to adhere to dyadic female/male categorization. An absolutist commitment to a dual and rigid classification system has also expressed itself through law: as Sally Hines has argued, ‘[a]lthough the law now allows for movement across the binary of male/female, the spectrums in- between male and female, such as transgendered, intersexed, bigendered and androgynous, remain outside current frameworks of citizenship’ (2007: para 1.3). What is more, some feminists have argued that transgender people’s struggles to be socially and legally accepted have in fact undermined the foundational concept of womanhood, upon which feminist struggles for equality are based; some have gone as far as to suggest that trans women are in fact men who have attempted to infiltrate women-only spaces (Raymond 1979). Others have argued strongly against women’s equality and rights campaigns as inclusive of trans women’s rights, either on the basis of sex, that is, a rigid biological binary, or gender, because of the significance of socialization as a woman (Boyle 2004). On the other hand, notwithstanding Susan Stryker’s question as to whether or not queer can ‘adequately account for the transgender phenomena’ (2011), Monro (2007: 142) has argued that queer-inspired gender pluralisms and an ‘alliance-based politics’ offer alternatives to the sex/gender binary and single issue politics of feminisms of the past. Similarly, Halberstam (2006: 97) has posited the possibility of ‘transgender feminism’ as ‘the exciting potential of a merger of trans and feminist politics’. Such a merger could enable ‘next-wave feminists’ (Halberstam 2006: 103) to establish or further common projects and goals that do not reify theory or practice (on the productive tensions and ‘contradictory tendencies’ of transgender politics see Halberstam 2012 and Cowan 2009). That there are some common feminist/trans goals seems incontrovertible. The constraining heteronormative assumptions and ideologies about sex and gender that underpin the dominant medico-legal and social discourses on what it means to be trans also shape the sexed/gendered lives of cisgender people. Maleness and femaleness, as medico-legally understood, seems always to implicate normative ideals of heterosexuality (not homo-, bi-, a-, or poly-sexuality); monogamy (not polygamy or polyamory); marriage (rather than non-marital relationships); conjugality (rather than intimacy or friendship); life-long commitment (rather than short-term, casual, or intermittent connections); dual (rather than solo or multiple) systems of partnership; and family life (based on the primacy of relationships with children, spouses, and relatives rather than friends, workmates, neighbours or non- spousal intimates). Each of these ideals reflects the deeply embedded existing heteronormative social and legal structures that permeate not only legal and political debates about trans issues, but about the politics and lived experiences of sex/gender more broadly; as such, they raise crucial questions for all critical analyses of law and the material social world around us. Contesting gender is not (solely) about ‘individual gestures of dissent’ but involves ‘a collective process (of) social struggle’ (Connell 2009: 110). As the critical trans scholar Dean Spade has recently argued (and as Carol Smart also suggested in 1989), this often means decentring law, and instead employing, indeed centring, non-legal community based strategies and striving for a shared imagination of transformative change (2011: 156). Accordingly, as I have argued elsewhere (Cowan 2009), it is important for feminists – indeed everyone interested in theorizing sex/gender and sexuality and their intersection with other vectors of human experience – to fully engage with the questions and debates raised by the ways in which transgender people’s lives are legally and socially regulated. No one term can serve as foundational. (Butler 1993: 240)This chapter has traced the emergence and evolution of feminist theorizing about sex, gender and sexuality. So how should contemporary feminists and others conceptualize sex/gender and sexuality? Butler has critiqued the ways in which gender discourse ‘absorbs and displaces “sex”’ (1993: 5), but although we may wish to avoid conflating the two, Lois Bibbings has identified how difficult it is ‘(linguistically and conceptually) to analyze the concepts “sex” and “gender”. If they are so interwoven, would it not be more accurate to talk of sex and gender as one thing?’ (2004: 223–224). As we have seen, feminist and queer theorists have taken different views on whether or not sex and gender are separable, and which, if any, should take analytical precedence. The underlying message of more recent arguments seems to be that despite heuristic advantages of separation, sex, sexuality and gender cannot be completely disaggregated, and to attempt to do so ‘may restrict rather than enhance our efforts to theorise the complex intersections’ (Richardson 2006: 27). Moreover, as Harrison notes, ‘there will never be any natural experiment in which we might find out what the sexed body entails entirely outside the ways in which it, and the person whose body it is, has been gendered’ (2006: 43). And, as contemporary feminist and queer theorists have argued, sex/gender and sexuality are linked not only through the oppositional homo/heterosexual binary, but also because ambiguity about sex/gender throws our expectations about sexuality into confusion, and vice versa. Initial concerns were raised that queer theory would neglect race or gender politics. Yet, queer theory has clearly had a major impact on contemporary feminism’s treatment of sex/gender and sexuality, and race. Recent queer of colour analyses, for example, have brought questions of the racialization of desire more centrally into focus (Hong and Ferguson 2011, Holland 2012, Ferguson 2004). Likewise queer crip studies offer provocative and rigorous analyses of the intersection of heteronormativity and norms that discipline the disabled body (McRuer 2011, McRuer and Samuels 2003). Queer theories can therefore offer another set of tools, overlapping with, yet distinct from, feminism, to view the ways in which sex/gender and sexuality remain central features of contemporary social and political life, and how they are interwoven with other aspects of material embodiment. Like feminism, queer theory may need to be continually rewritten, but both can offer a platform from which to make connections with other critical social theories such as critical race theory and crip studies. Moving away from the characterisation of feminism as the study of sex/gender and queer as the study of sexuality, then, we can see each theoretical enterprise as having overlapping territories (Richardson 2006: 26, Cossman 2003–4), where both have resonance and relevance for contemporary theorizing on sex/gender and sexuality and beyond.  On the question of the relationship between feminist legal theory, and ‘Law, Gender and Sexuality Studies’, see Conaghan (2009). As feminism acknowledges the queer critique and tries to more readily accommodate an analysis of sexuality which cannot be reduced purely to gender, or vice versa, so will feminism encourage queer theory to acknowledge the relevance of gender politics to analyses of sexuality and desire (MacIntosh 1993: 49). The future for feminism and for queer theory may well lie in ‘the articulation of new ways of thinking about how sexuality and gender’ – and, we might add, sex, race, class and physical embodiment – ‘are profoundly interconnected’ (Richardson 2006: 36, emphasis added). In turn this may lead us to consider the possibility of ways of being ‘which we do not yet know how to name or that sets a limit on all naming’ (Butler 2004: 74). John Potvin begins Bachelors of a Different Sort on an intimate note. He has just got married, he tells us, in the home in which he now lives with his husband. They have ceased to be bachelors. Let me make a confession of my own. I winced when I read that introduction. Not because it was infelicitous, but because I too have made a home with a man, and we remain bachelors of a different sort, because we are not married. It confuses people quite as much as if we were; but it was so different for so long that, for my boy- friend (we still call each other that, deep into middle age), the promised land of marital bliss seems like too alien a Canaan for us to enter. Bache- lors of a Different Sort tells the story of men who did not have the choices Potvin or I enjoy today. Instead they described themselves (without the contempor- ary scholarly baggage around the word) as ‘queer’. Call them artistic, or theatrical, or, as I once heard it put, ‘of the Athenian persuasion’, they possessed great talents: in art or the theatre, or exceptional wealth and taste as collectors. They used these talents to create homes for themselves and it is these homes that are the ostensible subject of this book for they, without children to mess them up, or women to tidy them, were queer sorts of places, too. Glamour aside, this is not a glossy coffee table book, and that is not just due to the economies of academic publishing. Histories of home are always problematic, most usually because their subject is not there to photograph any more. As Potvin notes, Penny Sparke and Susi McKellar ‘have importantly argued that there is a disjunction between heavy documented idealized interiors and ephemeral and poorly documented lived-in interiors’. Visual documents would be unreliable anyway, for as Charles Rice writes in his historiography of domestic space The Emergence of the Interior, ‘visual representations of interiors are not simply transparent to spatial referents, even if such spatial referents exist; representations construct interiors on a two dimensional surface as much as practices of decoration and furnishing construct interiors spatially’. But the interiors that form the subject of this book present a further problem. They are queer interiors, and as such, they doubly pass under the radar. What they represent, and how, is in itself a hidden history. All too often, the story of the (male) homosexual has been written as one of chance encounters in public places, and it has been assumed that the homosexual man is, of his nature, fundamentally alone. It has been a story that is easy to construct in an age before gay marriage or even cohabitation was socially acceptable; and it is a story from which domestic life has largely been absent. Potvin chal- lenges that omission, quoting Halberstam: ‘if we try to think about queerness as [the] outcome of strange temporalities, imaginative life schedules, and eccentric economic practices, we detach queer- ness from sexual identity and come close to under- stand [Michel] Foucault’s comment in “Friendship as a way of life” that homosexuality threatens people as a “way of life” rather than a way of having sex’. Instead, he writes, ‘we must ask our- selves what are the aesthetic, cultural, social, and political implications of interweaving one’s life with another person of the same sex?’ Potvin’s bachelors occupy an England between 1875 and 1957, between the passing of the Labou- chere amendment and the Wolfenden Report. The former criminalised homosexual acts not just in public places, but in private homes too. How queer men behaved, and decorated, their parlours needed to be in this period as closely coded as their behaviour in public. And it was coded very dif- ferently to the way that gay men visualise themselves today. This book ‘views queer identity and queer space as neither limited to sex acts, orgasm and genital pleasure, nor the outcome of a shaming closet, a post-Stonewall concept which had no bearing on the actual lived experiences of men and women prior to the second world war’. It was a world hidden in another way too, in which the distinction between the sexes was much more clearly cut than our own. As a result, Potvin argues that men found themselves alienated from the fem- inised activities of home making and ‘turned to alternative spaces and sought out venues in which homosociability was welcomed, celebrated, and even expected’. That was in the expectation that home (with its attendant family) would always be waiting for them after a day at work, or the club; what was to happen if there was no such place, because the man was a bachelor? The necessity of making a home did not disap- pear, and it set a paradoxical problem. Potvin quotes Thad Logan, who states that decoration announces ‘the home’s difference from the public world, to mark its separation from the marketplace, to mask the fact of [its] participation in the narrative of capitalism’. How, then, should men decorate their homes-as-refuges, so closely enmeshed in that public world, that marketplace, in the narratives of capital as they were? The bachelors of a different sort whose lives and homes are narrated in this book were ‘astute collec- tors, men who sought to redefine the parameters of domestic life and fashion’ in houses that were expensive, filled with beautiful and luxurious things, and arranged (especially since all of these men were artists or connoisseurs) with a keen eye. That they balanced the demands of public capital and domestic seclusion in this way was threatening, strange and defiant, and Potvin structures this book by according to each of the homes he describes a ‘deadly sin’. These sins, hovering as they do between the desirable and the wicked, ironise a ‘constant tension between resistance and shame’. The interior lives they frame form ‘the site of a social and intellectual polemic in a neo-conservative age of naming, assimilating, and ultimately repres- sing difference through subtle acts, modes, and apparati of shaming into submission’. First comes of the sin of idolatry—and in particular the cult of the diva. Nowadays it might be Judy, or Cher, but for Lord Gower in the second half of the nineteenth century it was Marie Antoinette, for he filled his home with bric-a-brac relating to the life of that tragic Queen. Gower, the scion of an ancient house, but inexplicably childless, created a house- museum containing ‘talismanic objects [...] that pro- vided a sense of attachment with the past and its luminaries, tragic or otherwise’. Tragic it was: he was forced to sell his Antoinettalia as clouds of scandal gathered around his reputation towards the end of his life. The homes shared by the painters Charles Shannon and Charles Ricketts must be discovered more obliquely, for ‘respectable bourgeois domes- ticity, even if queer, is easily silenced by history’. Living in ‘decadent simplicity and grand austerity’, the couple, while they were devoted, never admitted to a sexual liaison. Lacking the luxurious gloom of the homo homes of contemporary popular imagin- ation, their houses were filled with light, apparently respectable. Only later ‘distanced and removed from Wilde’s prison sentence, near the end of his own life, and yet not too far distant from a generation of the sting’s effect’ did Ricketts’ publication of Oscar Wilde: Recollections bear witness to the love that dare not speak its name. No such discretion afflicted the couples whose domestic lives are recounted in the next section, entitled ‘Country Living’. Edward Warren was a com- mitted ‘Uranian’ that is, a follower of the writings of Karl Heinrich Ulrich, the first writer to make ideologi- cal claims for same-sex relationships between men. However, this should not be confused with the con- temporary gay rights agenda—Ulrich’s model was Ancient Greece; and Warren’s home at Lewes in Sussex was called ‘Thebes’ to honour the Sacred Band of that ancient city, whose love led them to fight and die for one another in battle, and it was filled with sculpture and art celebrating the Greek Ideal. Warren’s sin was, Potvin argues, ‘askesis’, that is, ascetic training of the body and mind to an unnatural degree. It is an ideal still alive and well today in the body fascism of contemporary gay life. However, his own relationships were more complex, and in a way, sadder. John Marshall (he called him ‘Puppy’) acted (in public anyway) as his ‘secretary’ but left him, in the end, to marry. No such self-discipline afflicted the chaotic country houses of Sir Cedric Morris and Arthur Lett-Haines: ‘Floors were also scarcely visible through the mounds of bottles and saucers for the numerous house pets as well as the ancient Aga long past its glory days. One could equally find ‘woollen underwear steeping in bowls’, and the two would regularly stage spectacular rows in front of the art students with whom they filled the house in the summer to teach flower painting and still life. Their sin, writes Potvin, was that of being domestic and decorative, and it was precisely these aspects of their work ‘that would lead art historians and critics to write Morris and his companion out of the canon of British modern art’ preferring instead the austere, butch certainties of avant-garde Mod- ernism. It is in the final section of the book that Modern- ism itself must make its appearance; but in this story, queerness subverts even the eternal verities of Mod- ernism and Potvin attributes to Noel Coward and his homes that most queer, and most modern (-e rather than -ist) of vices: Glamour. Widely published in the celebrity mags, bleached at the hand of the decora- tor Syrie Maugham, but void of the stern moralities of Le Corbusier, Coward’s homes were airbrushed media products, to whose sleek surfaces no imputa- tion of aberration could adhere. His ‘queer time and space were firmly rooted in the present, a white- washed surface meant to obscure any (leftover) filth or debris of times long past’, writes Potvin, ‘ ... and as such [Coward’s modern home] fulfils the modernist drive to destroy that which came before’. Gower was a sentimental old queen (or at least adored one), Shannon and Ricketts serious-minded aesthetes, Warren and Marshall idealists, Morris and Lett-Haines chaotic bon viveurs, Coward a smooth performer, but it is in the final character in the story that we encounter perhaps the most recog- nisable pantomime dame of the piece, Cecil Beaton, and the sin of artifice. His trianon at Ashcombe, with its classical urns and candy cane columns and Tyro- lean costumes is the definitive camp interior which, whether intentionally or not, Potvin explores with sympathy. He quotes Susan Sontag: ‘it’s not a lamp but a “lamp” [...] to perceive Camp in objects and persons is to understand Being-as- playing-a-role’ and associates Beaton’s flamboy- ance with a strongly felt and continuous sense of shame, as well as defiance, about his sexuality. This last character in the story brings us to the modern notion of the closet, and Potvin concludes his account: ‘The so called closet as an open secret folds upon itself and marks a space of “knowing by not knowing”. It becomes the very apparatus of artifice that inadvertently exposes the hidden truths that supposedly lurk below; it is the very thing that allows queer material culture to be staged.’ This is an ambitious weaving of hidden histories— those of the interior, those of men, and those of queer people. It draws relationships that have largely been ‘ignored in accounts of sexuality and space, which have concentrated on the public mani- festations of male sexuality rather than domestic ones. The result is a sort of reification of the public/private divide by scholars[...] who, through a collective silence, render the home seemingly unin- telligible, feminine, and inconsequential.’ It is also filled with very human insight. Cecil Beaton stands at the locked bedroom door of the man he hoped would become his lover, red eyed and lip aquiver. Ricketts is the intense Svengali to the blond boy Shannon long after the curly hair has fallen away. Arthur Lett-Haines sulks in bed while Cedric Morris hides among his irises in the garden. Only, perhaps, Warren, enshrouded in austere ideology, and Coward, so smooth, so mediated, fail to speak to us so directly. Their homes are harder to imagine, constructed as they are of fragmentary accounts. I found myself unsure for example, about Rickett’s and Shannon’s home—on the one hand presented as lustrous wun- derkammer, and on the other described as so simple that they would entertain friends to dinner in the kitchen. On the other hand, the mass of documen- tation about Coward’s domestic arrangements feels a little underused: what did people say about it at the time? There is another problem here in that all the characters described are ‘creative’ people—and sometimes their work is discussed in substitution for and sometimes at the expense of their homes. It would be interesting to imagine a similar account of the homes of queer accountants or factory workers. One theme that could do with interesting extension is the idea of queer domestic time. Without children and women to regularise them, without ‘normal’ jobs, when did these men eat, or sleep, or go away? Their homes were almost all temporary arrangements, too: Morris and Lett-Haines’s a summer affair, packed up when they went hunting in the winter, Cecil Beaton’s Ashcombe a sort of gay Brideshead, to be longed for when lost, Warren’s a monument to an unrealised utopia. There is one other area for further work here that occurs to me, though it falls well beyond the scope of this volume. There’s a bachelor of a different sort again, even queerer than these ones, and almost uni- versally reviled. He is Henry James’s monstrous Gilbert Osmond in Portrait of Lady, ensconced in a palace of chilly grandeur. He is Rock Hudson, untamed by Doris Day in Pillow Talk. He is holding parties at the Heffner mansion long after his sell-by date. And after Wolfenden, and the age of consent, and gay marriage and all of that, he is looking stranger and stranger, and more and more worthy of serious study. He is the straight single man. The intention of this article is to challenge certain orthodoxies regarding hetero- sexuality – orthodoxies that have tended, in critical literatures, to constitute hetero- sexuality as a static monolith, an unvarying, commanding mass, and queer theories, identities and practices as the only potential source for a less oppressive sexuality. By contrast, we wish to consider heterodoxy within heterosexuality by exploring possibilities for non-normative pleasure and change within the realm of the dominant. What do we mean by ‘heterodoxy’ in this context? In general usage, heterodoxy is that which is at variance with, or that which differs or departs from the accepted, the standard, the status quo, the orthodox (Oxford English Dictionary, 2012), with- out necessarily being its opposite. Heterodoxy refers to a leaning toward the unorthodox. In departing from the strictly orthodox, it may extend to the dissident, but falls short of heresy. In several recent publications (e.g. Beasley et al., 2012; Holmes et al., 2011), we begin to set out an alternative approach to heterosexuality. This article provides an opportunity to develop and expand that approach. For us ‘heterodoxy’ is an apt term in that ‘hetero’ signifies both ‘difference’ and hetero- sexuality: it enables thinking about heterosexuality differently, if tentatively. We see our understanding of the heterodox reflected in a line from Leonard Cohen’s song ‘Anthem’: ‘[t]here is a crack in everything, that’s how the light gets in’. In order to develop an alternative approach to heterosexuality, we first of all discuss in more detail how and why we employ the term ‘heterodoxy’. Following this, we outline three brief examples of departures from the normative. These departures are figured as divergence, transgression and subversion, all of which are more closely detailed in our earlier work mentioned in the previous paragraph. In this article our examples are employed as succinct illustrations aimed at devel- oping a clearer articulation of the term heterodoxy, as well as an initial methodo- logical framework for future work. The examples presented offer a basis for consideration of some phenomenological terminologies that might be helpful for analysis of experiential movements between normativity and heterodoxy. The intention here is to consider not just the degrees to which practices might depart from the normative, but also how these departures are experienced. This conjunc- tion offers a means to acknowledge heterosexuality’s coercive aspects while attend- ing to its more egalitarian, less orthodox forms. Our discussion is, however, presently limited to English-language sources and western Anglophone contexts. Moreover, the focus is upon sexualities and to a lesser extent gender. Significant discussion of, for example, racialised/ethnic, dis- ability, age and class variations remains beyond the scope of this article. While elsewhere we have given some consideration to these, and aim to attend more closely to them in further work, here we foreground sexualities, gender and the theme of heterodoxy. This focus alone involves a substantial endeavour which can only be broadly outlined in a single article. We intend in this article to expand on earlier work in which we challenged the very common account of heterosexuality in critical gender/sexuality scholarship as nasty, boring and normative. Debates regarding this mainly pessimistic character- isation of heterosexuality are outlined in greater depth in Beasley et al. (2012). To summarise, we noted in that account that gender/sexuality scholarship is inclined to focus on heterosexuality’s more negative and disturbing aspects while, at the same time, casting it as uninteresting. Heterosexuality is usually critically conceived as homogeneous and synonymous with heteronormativity (see for example Bhattacharyya, 2002; Carroll, 2012; Dworkin, 2007 [1987]; Heise, 1997; Reis and Grossmark, 2009). Such presumptions play out the antagonisms of the ‘sex wars’, which raged in the 1980s but continue to be both implicitly and explicitly deployed in contemporary sexuality debates. The sex wars involve a dispute over whether sex is primarily dangerous or should be embraced as pleasurable (Duggan and Hunter, 2006). Moreover, in this dispute pleasure is routinely constituted as residing in ‘queer’ – meaning non-heterosexual – sex (Richardson, 2004). The oppositional stances of the sex wars thus leave heterosexuality in a dark, dull corner, its positive potential for joy and social change virtually unacknowledged and unexplored (but see Jackson and Scott, 2001, 2007; Meah et al., 2011). For us, considering the term heterodoxy means finding fissures in the supposed monolith of heterosexuality, and examining where the light gets in. In doing so, we do not examine important but well-explored aspects of heterosexuality – such as prostitution, sexual violence, sexual trafficking, or cultural representations of het- erosexuality –but rather consider less frequented corners. However, before attend- ing to how to undertake potentially heterodoxical research, it is helpful to clarify why we might embark upon this challenge to the orthodox account of heterosexu- ality as unpleasant and offering no recourse to social change. In this setting, we suggest that it is necessary to challenge the orthodoxy that heterosexuality is homogeneous and synonymous with heteronormativity. A crucial feature of heteronormativity is that it propounds a hegemonic coher- ence against which all sexualities – including heterosexual practices themselves – are judged. This expressly requires a suppression of diversity even within hetero- sexuality (see also Berlant and Warner, 1998: 548; Jackson, 2005, 2006; Richardson, 2004; Seidman, 2005: 40) and a lack of appreciation of its fluid and dynamic aspects (Hockey et al., 2007). Nevertheless, with few exceptions, critical gender/sexuality scholarship continues to conflate heterosexuality and heteronor- mativity as one and the same. Yet, if heterosexuality is simply equated with hetero- normativity, the hegemonic coherence of heteronormativity is ironically upheld. Furthermore, since change is conceived as occurring only at the margins, the majority of the populace can be inferred to be mere robotic conformists condemned to stand outside the gate of historical change. In contrast, our concern is to ‘undo’ heterosexuality, to undo the illusory homogeneity and authority of the heteronorm, in similar fashion to Butler’s ‘undoing’ or ‘troubling’ of gender (Butler, 1990, 2004). In the relatively rare discussion of non-normative sexual directions in relation to heterosexuality there has sometimes been an inclination to posit ‘queer heterosexu- ality’. While we employ ‘queer’ to describe a particular approach or mode of theorising, and as usually linked to LGBTI sexualities (Ahmed, 2006a; Richardson, 2004), we deliberately do not use it as an easy synonym or umbrella term for the non-normative. Why not? Why focus on the heterodox rather than the queer? First of all, there are certain problems attached to the conjunction of queer and heterosexuality. The conjunction has provoked debates about the appropriation of queer for use in relation to heterosexuality (see for example Brook, 1996; Davidson, 2005; Schlichter, 2004). ‘Queer heterosexuality’ looks suspiciously like a push for heterosexuality to ‘have it all’, to be both dominant and marginalised, such that heterosexuality invites itself along to the fashionably cool queer party without having had to pay the dues of marginalisation. Concerns about appropria- tion of the queer by heterosexual interests sometimes have practical manifestations. Recent (unsuccessful) requests to have a ‘Queer Heterosexuality’ float at the Sydney Mardi Gras, for example, produced controversy in a Facebook discussion over whether renouncing self-designation as heterosexual was necessary to queer identification, and relatedly, whether the ‘exclusion’ of heterosexuals from the rubric of queer sexuality is problematic. Apart from practical political issues about who or what can be queer, there are further reasons to hesitate regarding the appellation of ‘queer heterosexuality’. The radical potential of ‘queer’ to precisely signal the refusal of the homosexual/hetero- sexual binary, as well as highlighting the uncertainty and permeable fluidity of identity categories, may be said to sit awkwardly, or even incoherently, alongside any retention of a focus on heterosexuality (Beasley, 1999: 82, 88; Butler, 2013 [1997]: 471–472). As Green points out, queer thinking is about ‘radical deconstruc- tion’ and ‘radical subversion’ (2007: 28–29). Queer thinking denotes an ‘opposition to hegemonic norms’, a protest against the ‘normal’ and ‘static, norm-regulated identities’ By contrast, we would suggest that the broader arena of the non-normative is not inevitably as challenging as that to which the term ‘queer’ can more con- fidently lay claim. Indeed, the non-normative, as will be outlined shortly, may often include more mundane everyday activities, which are not always self- consciously directed political acts, or inevitably in opposition to the normative (Hockey et al., 2007; see also Note 1 of this article). To obscure the diversity of the non-normative by potentially sloppy over-use of the term ‘queer’ to encompass all sorts of practices not only risks diminishing its vital political significance, but also risks loss of recognition of a variety of more nuanced, fragile moments in analysis of social change. Perhaps the notion of a ‘queer heterosexuality’ might be best considered as a very specific, particularly challenging departure from hetero- sexual normativity. Our aim, however, is to consider a wider range of departures from the orthodox. This range includes those departures that might be merely contingently diver- gent to those which move towards the dissident and even heretical – that is, towards sexualities which might be more clearly aligned with the queer. In short, we wish to make a case for the significance of the term heterodoxy as signalling an extensive variety of non-normative heterosexual possibilities or innovations rele- vant to broader analysis of social change. Importantly, these innovations may continue to draw upon elements of the homosexual/heterosexual binary and do not presume the collapse of distinguishable sexual identity orientations. In other words, they may involve innovations within heterosexuality but nevertheless resist aspects of heteronormativity. Instead of heterosexuality looking like a homogenous monolith, in Figure 1 we visualise a framework for considering a range of non-normative elements in the realm of the dominant. At its normative core, where heterosexuality is indeed equated with heteronormativity, we can see what might be termed ‘cissexuality’ – a space where sexed body, gender, sexual orientation, desire, sexual practice and inter-relationality align neatly with what is deemed to be the honoured or hege- monic form of heterosexuality (Harrison, 2013: 12–13; Johnson, 2013: 12). Beyond this are comfortable and unthinking normative options which are perhaps less strictly or entirely aligned with the hegemonic, but which are nevertheless hegemo- nically satisfactory and ‘do the job’. An example of this ‘good enough’ normativity in a contemporary western setting might be a cohabiting heterosexual couple who remain unmarried. From this point onwards we begin to step into potentially non- normative terrain. In Figure 1, this stretches from ‘divergence’ through to the entirely ‘heretical’. Let us now turn briefly to the three departures from heteronormativity men- tioned earlier: divergence, transgression and subversion. We use these examples because all fall short of the more radical possibilities that might be associated with the term ‘queer heterosexuality’. We focus on them precisely to fill out the meaning of ‘heterodoxy’ and to consider the spaces for social change that, to our way of thinking, include much more than radical opposition. The discussion of these examples is necessarily schematic given limitations of space. For similar reasons, we focus on the conceptual/terminological, though there is reference to empirical scholarship and practical illustration. Divergence is closer to the norm than transgression, which in turn is closer than subversion. To diverge involves moving a little away from the norm while remaining within its purview, whereas to transgress involves straying from the straight and narrow path, but without that necessarily being the intention. By comparison, to subvert requires undermining the norm in a more reflexive fashion, although not always radically. Our first departure from the heterodox contests orthodoxies even at the centre of institutionalised heterosexuality – in this case, marriage. The orthodox view in critical gender/sexuality research is that heterosexual marriage is utterly and endur- ingly boring and normative: it is a bastion of heteronormative privilege. In this context, anti-gay US commentator Paul Cameron, for example, comments that ‘[m]arital sex tends toward the boring’ (Cameron as cited by Dreyfuss, 1999). Cameron’s view is repeated, in general, by critics as well as defenders of hetero- normativity. We do not wish to suggest that marriage is in fact a hotbed of exciting heterosexual innovation. However, we do question the way that heterosexual mar- riage and heteronormativity are so readily and routinely collapsed. We prefer to ask: does heterosexual marriage fall short of thoroughgoing heteronormativity? If marriage is not just a repository for homophobic and sexist imperatives, how might it be better conceptualised and understood? Our heterodox approach to marriage seeks to challenge the orthodoxy that marriage and heteronormativity are virtually identical. We are concerned here to consider what we have described as divergence from relentless conformity, to recognise that even in the seeming heartland of the heteronorm, the rhetorically effortless identity of marriage and heteronormativity is never quite realised. In a range of gender/feminist and sexualities scholarship, marriage has been positioned as a disciplining institution, as something whose primary function is to naturalise heterosexuality and gender roles. Adrienne Rich’s (1980) landmark essay on com- pulsory heterosexuality marks the beginning of a clear trajectory of scholarship on sexuality which suggests that marriage is heterosexuality’s premier institution (for example Emens, 2009; Robson, 2009; see also Jackson, 1996: 24). There seems no space here for inconsistency. In this context, while differences in conceptualisation and opinion amongst and between gay and lesbian thinkers on marriage are often acknowledged (see, for example, Gust et al., 2003; Rimmerman and Wilcox, 2007; Stychin and Herman, 2000; Wintemute and Andenæs, 2001; Wolfson, 1994), heterosexual perspectives remain likely to be treated as singularly hegemonic. Despite some academic accounts of intimacy and personal life that now acknowledge diversity in hetero- sexual relationships (Beck and Beck-Gernsheim, 2002; Budgeon and Roseneil, 2004), the notion of ‘the heterosexual family’ – singular, uniform – remains com- monplace (see Ferguson, 2007: 43 et passim). Yet heterosexual marriage is not one hegemonic structure. Instead we argue the position that (heterosexual) marriage is an institution whose meaning and effects for heteronormativity are dynamic and not entirely certain – a seemingly obvious, yet rarely acknowledged point. We note that acknowledgement of the possibility of inconsistency, the possibility of diver- gence, the existence of less than complete conformity, is an important means to open the conceptual and empirical gate to a more developed and dynamic account of sociality and social change. Commentators like Robert H Knight (American conservative writer, activist, and drafter of the US Defense of Marriage Act) argue that enabling same-sex marriage would mean the complete evacuation of its personal and institutional meaning (Knight, 1997). We assert that this wrongly positions marriage as, histori- cally, always and inevitably heterosexual. It is not. Even as it has indisputably policed and protected heterosexuality, marriage has been peopled by sexual sub- jects who resist categorisation as straightforwardly or merely heterosexual. Such subjects include, most obviously, transgendered spouses (Eskridge, 1996; Ford, 2000) but also include non-normative heterosexualities. A number of matrimonial, divorce, and family law judgments attest to spouses behaving in non-normatively heterosexual ways. The example of a wife who relentlessly badgered her exhausted husband for sex until he sought a divorce on grounds of her cruelty (see Willan v. Willan 1958 and Willan v. Willan 1960, UK, in Brook, 2007: 90–91), suggests the existence of something other than a narrowly ‘straight’, let alone a socially hon- oured mode of gendered heterosexuality, (even if it appears precisely in order to police the boundaries of acceptability). Similarly, other judgments complicate the assumed concord between reproductive and hetero-sex that characterises marital heteronormativity. Consummation within a marriage, for instance, has been held not to have legally occurred, despite the husband and wife having had a child who was their biological offspring (Clarke v. Clarke 1943, UK, in Brook, 2007: 75). Such examples are hardly routine, but appear as cracks in the institutional masonry of marriage. They represent moments of divergence from the normative (despite not operating as deliberate political protests) which should not be discounted or rendered invisible beneath the generality of marriage as institutional heteronormativity. Clearly, marriage has exhibited homophobic and sexist tendencies: more than this, the regulation of conjugality has, at certain moments, been primarily dedi- cated to heteronormative purposes (Brook, 2007). However, marriage does not merely naturalise, reward and protect heterosexuality. If the effect of institutiona- lised marriage is to preside over and mask a range of identities and practices, vesting them with falsely heteronormative uniformity, rejecting this characterisa- tion becomes politically salient. We envisage here a theorisation of conjugality in which heterosexuality is not always or inevitably complicit in constructing institu- tional privilege, even though it may be heteronormatively enveloped. This work may require attention to detail, but even in very narrow fissures, light may get in. Beyond the normative core, a heterodox approach is even more significant when considering transgressive possibilities for misbehaviour, lapses and indiscretions as offences against the hetero-norm. These offences may edge towards lawbreaking, without deliberately undermining ‘hetero-law’. We suggest that it has become an orthodoxy to view queer sexualities as the site of transgressive sex. By contrast, heterosexuality continues to be critically assessed as typically unpleasant and inequitable (Beasley, 2011; Beasley et al., 2012). On this basis it is viewed as of limited theoretical interest and is implicitly equated with political stasis (see Rossi, 2011: 10). Thus, reassessing the link between transgression and heterosexuality becomes important because transgres- sion can be politically significant. Elizabeth Wilson asserts, when discussing the example of a woman using a dildo on her male sexual partner, that no matter how transgressive or ‘queer’ this couple might feel themselves to be, to the world they are just ‘kinky’ heterosexuals. Many other examples of transgression exist, and perceptions of what might be deemed ’kinky’ vary. However, the crucial point here is that Wilson does not think that transgressive experimentation with sexual prac- tices and roles makes any meaningful contribution to social change (Wilson, 1997: 169). Against Wilson, we argue that transgression can invoke possibilities for politics. ‘Kinky’ or otherwise innovative heterosexual sex is not always or necessarily poli- tically meaningless. To rehearse the catchphrase of second-wave feminism, the personal remains political, and the effects of a range of sexual practices are not necessarily confined to the private. Hence we reconsider innovative sexual (that is, ‘private’) conduct in terms of the political. In this context, the term transgression is especially useful for our investigation of heterodoxy. Transgression in the realm of heterosexuality is not necessarily about decisive ruptures, breaks, or fissures. While it may include a more overt invocation to law-breaking that connects private practices to public politics, it also retains a broader association with ‘wrongdoing’ and ‘wandering’. It becomes possible to consider private sexual conduct, such as innovative hetero-sex, as a potential moment of transgression. We see transgression as a term that is more about straying from, rather than undermining normative regimes. Heterodox ways of ‘doing heterosexuality’ (Rossi, 2011: 20) require theorisation which moves beyond the simple equation of hetero- sexuality with heteronormativity. However, if heterosexuality is not a heteronor- mative ‘closed book’, what might transgression in the realm of the dominant look like? We have several thoughts on this, but will mention just one for now. In con- ceptualising a transgressive heterosexuality, it is necessary to attend to the privile- ging of phallic hetero-masculine sex and, for us, this indicates a necessary confrontation with the abjection of the penetrated. Pro-sex queer theorists have raised doubts about the seemingly self-evident hierarchical relation between the penetrator and penetrated (Thomson, 2011: 243, 250). By contrast with Wilson’s rather disparaging assessment of innovations in penetrative hetero-sex, this seems to us a useful direction when thinking about the meaning of transgression. Queer theorising unravels stereotypical gendered/sexual alignments such that, for example, the penetrated cannot be presumed to occupy a particular gender or a particular sexual orientation, and is not necessarily located as socially subordinate or sexually abject. For example, Bobby Noble and Ann Cvetkovich draw attention to an active sexual receptivity that defies traditional sexual taxonomies in their discussions of gender queer, butch-femme and gay male ‘bottom’ narratives (Noble, 2007: 161–164; Cvetkovich, 1995: 136–137). In considering transgressive possibilities we must be equally alert to the complex ways in which people occupy and perform heterosexual practices. Our outline of heterodox heterosexuality now moves beyond the transgressive to explore subversive possibilities. Subversion involves a more purposeful, conscious challenge to the orthodox. Where transgression can be an accidental straying from the norm, subversion is more deliberate, even if not undertaken as a deliberately ‘political’ stand. And, while transgression has a more temporary aspect, subversion entails taking a slightly more lasting path. As noted with regard to transgression, subversive challenges to heterosexuality are not limited to merely exotic forms of sexual relating. Diverse forms of heterosexuality can subversively exceed the het- eronorm: think of deliberate childlessness for example. However, given limitations of space here, we will just consider one form, which in this case upsets normative assumptions about heterosexuality as always or inevitably assuming cohabiting couple relationships. Although non-cohabitation of partners is not new, nor neces- sarily revolutionary, contemporary decisions to not co-reside with a partner can signify and produce a reflexive questioning of the centrality of heterosexual rela- tionships in people’s lives (Roseneil, 2005). Non-cohabitation also returns us to an issue raised in relation to transgression in suggesting that some heterosexual cou- ples might ‘undo’ heteronormative accounts of hetero-sex as necessarily equivalent to penetrative penis-vagina sex. Some non-cohabiting couples subvert hegemonic heterosexual ‘sexual scripts’ (Gagnon and Simon, 2005 [1973]), which designate physical closeness to be a key sign of the commitment, familiarity, privileged knowledge, and active caring that supposedly comprise intimacy (Giddens, 1992: 96–98; Jamieson, 1998: 8; Lasch, 1995: xiii–xvii, 138–140; Smart, 2007). Heterodox forms of non-cohabiting inti- macy may include couples living apart together (‘LAT’ – that is, couples who live separately), some of whom live nearby and others in ‘distance relationships’ (see Duncan and Phillips, 2010; Holmes, 2006). Such relationships reveal that proximity does not guarantee intimacy, and intimacy can be maintained without proximity (Baldassar et al., 2007; Holmes, 2004, 2010). All relationships deal with some degree of physical and emotional distance occasionally (Simmel, 1971 [1908]), but some heterosexual couples more obviously subvert hegemonic norms of coha- bitation and hence understandings of heterosexual coupledom, commitment and intimacy. Non-cohabitation can involve deliberate efforts to find more independent or mutual ways of relating (Holmes, 2004). Such heterodox forms of intimacy may well be responses to increased geographical mobility and other practices to which many people are compelled by processes of globalisation (Bauman, 2003; Elliott and Urry, 2010). Non-cohabitation not only potentially involves challenges to the normative heterosexual ideal of legitimate commitment but clearly suggests some questions about what constitutes sexual relationality. Living together is not always sexually exciting or even satisfactory, and living apart does not necessarily reduce sexual pleasure or activity (Gerstel and Gross, 1984: 62–66). Not cohabiting may sometimes offer more sexual excitement than cohabiting. Not cohabiting can avoid over-familiarity. Being apart often may force couples to communicate better, avoid conflict and enhance romance (Gerstel and Gross, 1984: 74–77; Holmes, 2004). Doing heterosexual relationships differently can bring a feeling of exploration and excitement, or quieter but nonetheless subversive enjoy- ments, including those mobilised in communications, imaginings and memories. Relatedly, some forms of non-cohabiting intimate heterosexual relationships can also provide heterodox experiences of ‘the sexual’, which subvert the importance usually given to penetrative penis-vagina sex. Doing things differently, even if not challenging the normative in markedly radical or ‘queer’ terms, can nevertheless provide opportunities for pleasure and possibilities for change. Figure 1, used to visualise the non-monolithic diversity of heterosexualities, sug- gests a terrain of socially situated and embodied practices ripe for empirical research. In keeping with understandings of ‘queer’ as a verb rather than noun, as a range of actions rather than modes of identity or being (Showden, 2012: 9; Sullivan, 2003: 50), our aim is to enable research on heterosexuality to invoke a sense of dynamism and interrelational uncertainty, such that heterodoxy is con- ceived as processual, as non-normative practices, rather than as a question of ‘types’ of identities or even coherent or ongoing behaviours. Heterodoxy may be temporary, contingent and fleeting, as well as sometimes deliberate, decisive and ongoing. Such different temporalities may exist simultaneously with regard to different practices. In this setting, it becomes crucial to move beyond a schematic plane of heterosexual possibilities (as illustrated in the figure), towards consideration of how we might recognise, conceptualise and research experiential movements between normativity and innovation. To prepare the ground for such empirically based research we draw upon and reconfigure certain phenomenological terminologies employed within queer post- colonial thinking that might be useful in fleshing out the schematic paradigm so far outlined. These terminologies are chosen as a starting point because they focus on how queer subjects move between normativity and queer possibilities. While they focus on queer trajectories, these terminologies can nevertheless provide a means to grasp how heterosexual subjects might interact with and sometimes move between the borders of normativity and degrees of heterodoxy. Tulia Thompson (forthcoming) both draws upon and reworks terminologies employed by Sara Ahmed in her book, Queer Phenomenology (2006a). Thompson’s discussion provides a basis for reconsidering these in the setting of heterosexual heterodoxy. Thompson notes that Ahmed’s usage of phenome- nological terms tends to construct the experiential through ‘an individualised human body as the vehicle for perception’ (Thompson, forthcoming: 47, emphasis added). This is despite Ahmed’s linkage of sexual/bodily ‘orientation’ with the politics of colonialism. For Thompson, the analysis of queer subjects’ movements between normativity and innovation requires a less Eurocentric, less individualised account: one which is not just perceptual, but more strongly integrates intersubjec- tive, communal, systemic and institutional imperatives (Thompson, forthcoming: 47, 55, 35). In this context, Ahmed’s use of terms like ‘orientation’, ‘lines’ and ‘directions’ as ways to describe the accrued constraining force of social require- ments (Ahmed, 2006a: 11, 14–16, 21) may appear as somewhat too linear and individually oriented. We suggest, in the context of developing concepts to aid in researching heterodoxy, that it may be helpful to talk about ‘scenarios’ which emphasize active interrelational contextual location rather than a singular path or line of sight. There may be similar issues with Ahmed’s employment of the terms, ‘straigh- tening’, ‘stopping’ and ‘disorientation’ (Ahmed, 2006a: 66–67, 92, 139, 140). ‘Straightening’ refers to experiences of being brought back into line with norma- tivity, ‘stopping’ to coming up against social obstacles which impede shifts away from normativity, and ‘disorientation’ to moments in which there is an awareness of other possibilities than the normative. These terms may also tend towards the assumption of an individualised perceptual subject. However, we consider that they do perhaps enable some space for thinking about and investigating heterodoxy empirically. All the same, such terms tend to have a more dramatic and perhaps more oppositional stance – perhaps arising from their particular relevance to and focus on queer subjects. For this reason we prefer the term ‘swivelling’ developed by Thompson (forthcoming: 134) to denote the less radical inclination of many straight and queer people to turn back and forth between normative and heterodox possibilities in relation to sexuality, indicating an active and unceasing modulation rather than the linearity of a queer path which is interrupted – which tends to be the way Ahmed’s terms describe experiential movements. Why make a point of such terms? For us, they suggest qualitative markers for empirical investigation. It is possible to ask subjects to consider whether they might have felt they were straightened up or stopped in relation to their experience of heterosexuality, whether they felt they were required to swivel back and forth between the accepted and the less orthodox, or whether they ever felt disoriented and had a sense of alternatives with which they were not familiar. Such qualitative markers can provide a means for articulating experiential movements within and across a taxonomy of heterosexual scenarios. Bhattacharyya’s summative point regarding the social location of heterosexuality – that is, straights ‘are just straight’ (2002: 22) – cannot be all that sexuality scholar- ship says about the subject. In this context, it is asserted that non-normative possibilities should not be understood as available only at the social margins. Instead, such possibilities may be intrinsic within even dominant practices like heterosexuality. Heterodox ways of ‘doing heterosexuality and heterogenders’ (Rossi, 2011: 20) require conceptual theorisation and empirical scrutiny in ways which move beyond the equation of heterosexuality with heteronormativity. With this aim in mind, how then might heterodoxy be understood and investigated? Developing the notion of heterodoxy provides a means to critically examine a number of orthodoxies about heterosexuality, enabling exploration of possibilities for change even where these are not self-consciously or deliberately political. In order to undertake this exploration we firstly outlined why heterodoxy might be a useful way of discussing the non-normative, and then used three gradients of dis- sent to illustrate this – divergence, transgression and subversion. Finally, we turned from these illustrations to a brief account of potentially useful terms drawn from queer postcolonial thought to explore how subjects might experience location within and movement across these gradients. The conjunction of examining diverse practices in heterosexuality, along with a focus on experiential turning points, is primarily aimed towards the development and use of the term ‘heterodoxy’, but is also intended to signal an initial metho- dological framework for future theoretical and empirically based work. By this means, we hope to better understand and contest heterosexuality’s coercive aspects while also gaining a better understanding of how more egalitarian forms of hetero- sexuality might be possible. ‘Queer European Cinema’, the theme of this Studies in European Cinema special issue, combines two complex constructs: Europe and Queer. Attempts to define ‘Europe’ are fraught with complexity, particularly when linked to identity, such as citizenship. ‘Queer’, too, is – intentionally – difficult to define. The word first entered the English language in the sixteenth century to mean strange or eccentric and by the twentieth century was used as a derogatory term, especially to describe men perceived as ‘effeminate’, ‘manly’ women, and what later came to be known as ‘gay’ people in general. In the 1980s, in the midst of the AIDS crisis, the word was reclaimed and used either neutrally or positively as an umbrella term by some lesbian, gay, bisexual, and trans (LGBT) people, who came together – in a way they never had before and have not done since – in order to care for those who were HIV+ and to protest against their treatment, particularly by the Reagan administration in the USA. From this grass-roots political reclamation, queer was then picked up in the academy: a seminal work in what came to be known as queer theory is Judith Butler’s Gender Trou- ble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity (1990), in which Butler argues that gender is constructed through the repetition of the dominant conventions of gender so that it appears to be inherent or natural, which she terms ‘gender performativity’ and later distinguishes from the ‘bounded act’ of performance (1993, 234). Although gender performativity is a ‘doing’ rather than a ‘being’, Butler contests the idea of a ‘doer’ behind the ‘deed’ (1990, 25). Where queer theory originally considered gender and sexuality, a noteworthy trend in the past decade is that of queer temporality, with a focus on non-normative life schedules either alongside or rather than queer gender or sexuality. Although queer space has been discussed and theorized by numerous scholars in recent years, notably J. Jack Halberstam and José Esteban Muñoz, it is the focus on queer temporalities, rather than space, both of which were highlighted in Halberstam’s A Queer Time and Place: Transgender Bodies, Subcultural Lives (2005), that has really been trending in queer scholarship, including work by Lee Edelman (2004), Elizabeth Freeman (2007) and José Esteban Muñoz (2009) to name just a few scholars who have contributed significantly to this area. Furthermore, queer is frequently used not only as an adjective or a noun, but also a verb: to queer can mean to read against the grain e.g. highlighting homoerotic or queer elements in film that is otherwise perceived as straight and is a technique long used by LGBT cinema-goers in order to identify more identities like, or similar to, their own, particularly in times when there was a dearth of homosexuality onscreen. More recently, it has been employed by academics whose queer readings aim to subvert a text. Before considering the queer films of Europe and beyond analysed in this special issue, let us step back to reflect on the brief – due to space constraints – history of LGBTQ film in countries and cinemas of the five articles contained here, which both outlines examples of the aforementioned subversive against the grain queering as well as more obvious depictions of LGBTQ subjects. This introduction does, therefore, not only identify dominant trends and overlaps both within and across countries and time periods, creating somewhat of a queer time and space in itself, but also frames the series of issues on Queer European Cinema that I am editing, of which this is the first. While onscreen space is examined here, the next issue in this collection will focus on the significance of queer space both onscreen and off: queer film festivals. The Dickinson Experimental Sound Film (William Kennedy 1895), from the USA, has been read as the first depiction of homosexuality in film as it features two men dancing together, which certainly can be read as homoerotic or queer, regardless of sex- uality. Cross-dressing, too, featured in relatively early film, but gender bending by actors as well known as Charlie Chaplin and Fatty Arbuckle was halted by the introduction of the Motion Picture Code, commonly known as the Hays Code, in 1930. Indeed, social and political reality majorly influenced the big screen. During wartime, notably the Sec- ond World War, queer characters were often represented as anti-social, criminal or men- tally ill by Hollywood, meaning they were frequently pursued by authorities, with Rope (Alfred Hitchcock 1948), appearing shortly after the end of the war, a well-known example of the latter. With the Hays Code still in place, the 1950s and 1960s saw the increasing use of innuendo to hint at LGB sexualities, before Andy Warhol’s transgres- sive independent cinema helped to create more complex queer characters in films such as My Hustler (1965) and Bike Boy (1967). The Stonewall riots in New York City in 1969, in which gay voices made themselves heard, meant Hollywood considered marketing film to gay people, targeting what came to be known as the pink pound via gay male protagonists in The Boys in the Band (William Friedkin 1970), although the film adhered to negative stereotypes of gay men, and follow- ing up with Fortune and Men’s Eyes (Harvey Hart 1971), a gay man’s prison drama, and the much-celebrated Cabaret (Bob Fosse 1972), starring Liza Minnelli. Later, independent film Parting Glances (Bill Sherwood 1986) drew attention to the AIDS crisis that the gov- ernment tried to ignore, before the first mainstream Hollywood film about the pandemic, Longtime Companion (Norman René 1989), which would be followed by Tom Hanks’ HIV+ protagonist in Academy Award-winning Philadelphia (Jonathan Demme 1993). Despite these characters being considered ‘other’ within the mainstream due to their HIV status and homosexuality, they were still otherwise respectable, wealthy, and white. New Queer Cinema, coined by B. Ruby Rich in her eponymous Sight and Sound article (1992), is a movement comprising films with a wide variety of themes and styles, although all have three things in common: they are queer films made by queers and with a freedom from previous conventions such as the demand for positive imagery of lesbians and gay men, as advocated by the Gay Liberation movement of the 1970s and 1980s. Many of the films belonging to New Queer Cinema were made in North Amer- ica, particularly the US, including: Poison (Todd Haynes 1991); My Own Private Idaho (Gus Van Sant 1991); The Living End (Gregg Araki 1992); Go Fish (Rose Troche 1994) and The Watermelon Woman (Cheryl Dunye 1996), with the latter two explicitly dealing with lesbianism and Dunye’s film often acknowledged as the first-ever feature to be directed by a Black lesbian. However, some films by European film-makers have been read as part of New Queer Cinema, including Edward II (1991) and My Beautiful Laundrette (1985) by British film-makers Derek Jarman and Stephen Frears, respectively, and work by German-born film-maker Monika Treut, who is discussed in more detail shortly. Boys Don’t Cry (Kimberly Peirce 1999), examined in Dawson’s article, achieved such critical and mainstream success that is was said to sound the death knoll for New Queer Cinema. Recent years have seen numerous depictions of both LBGT characters and queerness on the Hollywood screen, such as The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert (Ste- phan Elliott 1994), To Wong Foo, Thanks for Everything! Julie Newmar (Beeban Kidron 1995), Brokeback Mountain (Ang Lee 2005) – the latter an Academy Award-winner direc- ted by a heterosexual cis man that has been criticized for capitalizing on the momentum of New Queer Cinema’s queer film by queers – Monster (Patty Jenkins 2003), Transamer- ica (Duncan Tucker 2005), Milk (Gus Van Sant 2008), Black Swan (Darren Aronofsky 2010), The Kids are Alright (Lisa Cholodenko 2010) and Freeheld (Peter Sollett 2015), with many well-known actors desperate to show their versatility by playing LGBTQ roles and frequent recognition for these performances in major awards ceremonies. Moving in time and space to step back and queer film history across the Atlantic, Alice A. Kuzniar explains in The Queer German Cinema that German films produced since the Weimar era have ‘played a leading, innovative role in the annals of gay and lesbian film, with the tantalizing sexual intelligibility and gender instability of figures from the 1920s screen anticipating the queer sensibilities of the 1990s’ and New Queer Cinema in particular (2000, 1). Examples include silent films Michael (Carl Theodor Dreyer 1924), Sex in Chains (William Dieterle 1928) and Pandora’s Box (1929) by Austrian director, G.W. Pabst, which includes a subplot featuring a masculine lesbian in a tuxedo. The tuxedo-wearing woman is an image perhaps best recalled via the iconic cinematic figure of Marlene Dietrich, who rose to fame in one of the first-ever talkies, or sound films, The Blue Angel (Josef von Sternberg 1930), which was shot simultane- ously in German and English and featured Dietrich as cabaret performer Lola Lola lead- ing a man to his downfall in a range of boundary-pushing outfits and accessories, including a top hat. Her genderqueer performance continued in Morocco (Josef von Sternberg 1930) after she located to the USA to work with Sternberg and Paramount Pictures. Morocco once again saw Dietrich play a cabaret singer, Amy Jolly, who dons a top hat, tuxedo and white bow tie, but progresses from the heterosexuality coupled with gender play of The Blue Angel to a queer gender and sexuality when she kisses a female audience member while wearing a tuxedo. As indicated in Dawson’s article, which opens this special issue, the USA and Germany have long collaborated cinemati- cally, with those directors and actors fleeing to the US to escape the National Socialist regime profoundly influencing Hollywood and beyond. Somewhat overshadowed by Dietrich in The Blue Angel, the first German-language sound film with a pro-lesbian sto- ryline, the Weimar Republic’s Girls in Uniform (Leontine Sagan 1931), also makes use of cross-dressing and the staged performance to explore lesbian themes and has gone on to inspire numerous lesbian boarding school films, and works of literature, on both sides of the Atlantic, as well as musical comedy Viktor and Viktoria (Reinhold Schnüzel 1933) about a cis woman pretending to be a man impersonating a woman. While the interwar period saw a flourishing homosexual subculture in Berlin, with gay people socializing in specialist bars and cafes, the rise of National Socialism, the Second World War, and the aftermath of the Holocaust meant a dearth of German LGBTQ cinema. During the New German Cinema of the 1960s and 1970s, film-makers wanted to make a break from what had gone before, both artistically and politically, with many of them signing the Oberhausen Manifesto, which declared ‘the old cinema is dead, we believe in the new cinema’. One of whom, Volker Schlöndorff, directed Young Törless (1966) a homoerotic story about sadistic boys at an Austrian boarding school. Peter Fleischman, the co-founder of Schlöndorff’s film production company, Hallelujah Film, created in 1969, directed Hunting Scenes from Bavaria (1969), about a man suspected of being gay and was West Germany’s official submission to the Best Foreign Language Film category of the Academy Awards, but was not nominated. An ally of the Oberhausen Manifesto and New German Cinema’s most infamous film-maker, Rainer Werner Fassbinder, who declared himself both bisexual and gay, pushed boundaries relating to gender, sexuality and ethnicity, with some of his most notable works including LGBTQ identities such as The Bitter Tears of Petra von Kant (1972), about an abusive lesbian relationship between a fashion designer and a model, Fox and His Friends (1975), following a working-class gay carnival worker from his lottery win to his untimely death, and In a Year of 13 Moons (1978), which focuses on the difficulties of a trans character, Elvira. His final film, Querelle (1982), is based on the work of Jean Genet, whose cinematic output I address shortly. Meanwhile, Christiane F (Uli Edel 1981), about the eponymous real-life teenager, caused controversy and gained cult status with its portrayal of hard drug use and prosti- tution, gay and straight, in West Germany. That same year, autobiographical Taxi zum Klo (Taxi to the Toilet) (Frank Ripploh) juxtaposed the respectable life of a popular schoolteacher with his cruising and anonymous sexual encounters. East Germany, too, made queer film in the 1980s, with award-winning Coming Out (Heiner Carow 1989) showing the protagonist admitting his homosexuality to himself and others. The film premiered on the night the Berlin Wall fell. Throughout these historically turbulent and cinematically varied periods, Rosa von Praunheim made film with LGBT themes, including It Is Not the Homosexual Who Is Perverse, But the Society in Which He Lives (1971), following a gay man’s move to the big city of Berlin, which not only pushed boundaries with regard to homosexual content at that time, but also in terms of style for the experimental film features non- synchronized sound and image. Praunheim later made Horror Vacui (1984) about a gay couple living in Berlin where one of them, Frankie, becomes involved with a cult led by Madame C, a former Nazi who, along with male and female cult members, rapes Frankie upon discovering he is gay. Praunheim’s I Am My Own Woman (1992) also revolves around queerness and Naziism, following Charlotte von Mahlsdorf, a trans woman who lived through Nazi persecution and who later played a role in the Gay Liberation move- ment. Controversially, Praunheim’s documentary, Men, Heroes, and Gay Nazis (2005) investigates gay men who have extreme right-wing and Nazi beliefs. Keen to address dif- ficult topics, Praunheim had made A Virus Knows No Morals (1986), a dark comedy about the AIDS epidemic and, often considering the intersection of history and sexuality, went on to create The Einstein of Sex: Life and Work of Dr. M. Hirschfeld (1999), a work blending fiction with the reality of the eponymous Jewish sexologist. Behind the camera for The Einstein of Sex was Elfi Mikesch who, along with film-maker Monika Treut, has significantly pushed boundaries both within and beyond German cinema. As a prolific lesbian feminist film-maker, Treut has been linked to the aforementioned New Queer Cinema with her representation of queer genders and sexualities in films such as Gendernauts (1999), a documentary focusing on trans, non-binary, and genderqueer subjects in the San Francisco area. Along with Mikesch, she made Seduction: The Cruel Woman (1985), about a female dominatrix’ sadomasochistic relationships with men and women and inspired by Leopold von Sacher-Masoch’s novella, Venus in Furs (1870). After an exploration of other minority and outsider identities, Treut returned to a focus on lesbian sexuality with both Ghosted (2009) and Of Girls and Horses (2014). German heritage cinema, too, has shown a marked interest in queer subject matters, such as Max Färberböck’s Aimée & Jaguar (1999) about a lesbian relationship between a Jew passing as gentile and her lover, an Aryan, married, mother-of-four in war-torn Berlin. The Berlin School has also been queered, with director Christian Petzold’s Ghosts (2005) featuring female protagonists who have a sexual relationship. Meanwhile, both coming-of-age drama Summer Storm (Marco Kreuzpainter 2004) and Free Fall (Stephan Lacant 2013) somewhat normalize same-sex relations. The latter recounts the gay relationship between two male police officers, one of whom has a pregnant girlfriend, and has been compared to Brokeback Mountain. Queer cinema has played a role in shaping the recent horror trend. Films from 2006, such as Cannibal (Marian Dora) and Grimm Love (Martin Weisz) appear to be inspired by real-life homosexual cannibal killer Armin Meiwes’ internet search for a victim will- ing to be eaten and the young man who volunteers. The popular lesbian vampire story is retold in We Are the Night (Dennis Gansel 2010), which explores lesbian separatist ideas promoted by Valerie Solanas, she who shot Andy Warhol, and is the latest in a long line of lesbian vampire stories, such as Vampyros Lesbos (Jesús Franco 1971), a transnational West German–Spanish horror film made in Turkey. One of the most popular representations of lesbianism, I will return to the trend for conflating lesbianism and vampirism onscreen throughout this introduction. Despite the recent trend for Transnational Film Studies within the academy, cinema has long been transnational, with cast and crew moving around the globe to work on film. However, the rise of social media and increasingly transnational practices of film production, distribution and funding, including crowdfunding campaigns, have been of considerable benefit to queer film-makers and queer communities around the globe, for whom the blurring of boundaries and the crossing of borders may be very significant for both identity and cultural production. Older transnational film includes some of Diet- rich’s work, as well as more recent films from before the rise of the digital age, such as the English- and German-language Salmonberries (Percy Adlon 1991), starring k.d. lang as an androgynous Alaskan woman and her relationship with a female East German immigrant. Even more recently, A Little Bit of Freedom (2003), by Kurdish director Yüksel Yavuz follows the friendship turned romantic relationship between two illegal immigrant boys in Germany, while My Friend from Faro (Nana Neul 2008) focuses on teenage tomboy Mel who assumes the identity of a Portuguese boy. The relationship between a Turkish asylum seeker and her lesbian lover is explored in Fatih Akin’s The Edge of Heaven (2007). Furthermore, there has been a marked shift from immigrants represented as unhappy victims by German directors in the 1980s, to more playful and parodic representations of immigrants by Turkish, and other, directors working and/or living in Germany. Turkish Kutlu?? Ataman’s film, Lola + Bilidikid (1999), revolving around bilingual – German and Turkish – trans subjects, drag queens, and rent boys in Berlin is one such example. This Turkish interjection is interesting with regard to – much less prolific – LGBTQ representation in Turkish cinema. Artist and film-maker Ataman is a key name in Turk- ish queer cinema and his oeuvre consists of films such as Never My Soul (2001) about a Turkish trans woman living in Switzerland and working as a prostitute, and 2 Girls (2005), a homoerotic story of two teenagers. Earlier Turkish film includes Köçek (Nejat Saydam 1975), translated as Dancing Boy, about an androgynous boy abducted by a gang and forced to dress like a woman, before undergoing gender reassignment and working as a belly dancer. Both the move towards the new millennium and the nough- ties have seen a rise in Turkish queer film in Turkey, such as Istanbul Beneath My Wings (Mustafa Altioklar 1996), I Saw the Sun (Mahsun Kirmizgül 2009), The Queen is in the Factory (Ali Kemal Güven 2008) and Other Angels (Emre Yalgun 2010). While much Turkish cinema has failed to receive significant international attention, French film Blue is the Warmest Colour (Abdellatif Kechiche 2013) made a huge impact when it won the Palme d’Or at the Cannes Film Festival in 2013, the same year that gay marriage was legalized in France. Traditionally, France has been seen as one of the most liberal countries in the world, with the civil solidarity pact or PACS (pacte civil de solidarité), offering some legal status and rights to same-sex couples since 1999. In terms of culture, lesbianism has long been represented on the French screen with many instances of same-sex female desire in the interwar period, such as Club de Femmes (Jacques Deval 1936), about women in a Parisian boarding house, and La Garçonne (Jean de Limur 1936), featuring Arletty, Edith Piaf, and a lesbian affair. In the post-war years of the 1950s, France was pushing filmic boundaries in a way seldom seen elsewhere at that time. Legendary French writer Jean Genet made only one film, Un chant d’amour (1950), a fantasy set in a men’s prison, with scenes featuring masturbation and explicit nudity leading to bans and various edits over the years. The film would later influence German film-maker, Rainer Werner Fassbinder with his own work, especially Querelle (1982), while Genet’s literary oeuvre partially inspired New Queer Cinema’s Posion (Todd Haynes 1991). In 1950 Jean Cocteau’s Orphée was also released and, although onscreen relationships are undoubtedly heterosexual, it has been read queerly, mostly due to the imagery and the fact Cocteau cast his former lover, Jean Marais, as Orphée. Lesbians were not overlooked in this period. Olivia (Jacqueline Audry 1951), about a young English girl in love with her schoolmistress at a French finishing school, recalls the earlier German-language Girls in Uniform, which would be remade in a much straighter and tamer version in 1958 (Géza von Radvànyi). Later, Les Biches (The Does) directed by Claude Chabrol and released in 1968, portrayed a tortur- ous lesbian relationship, and Girl Slaves of Morgana Le Fay (Bruni Gantillon 1971) is a lesbian exploitation film, in which Morgane grants eternal youth and beauty to those who are willing to make a pact with her, giving her their soul. In the meantime, the 1960s saw the rise of the nouvelle vague, or French New Wave, which inspired the aforementioned New German Cinema, and attempted to make a break – politically and stylistically – from what had come before and sometimes showed a new kind of woman: short-haired, sassy and increasingly stronger. Partner of rive gauche film-maker, Agnès Varda, Jacques Demy made Les Demoiselles de Roche- fort (1967), a colourful musical, which could be read as queer due to non-normative lifestyles and a campness to both style and content. Even more queer cinema was made in the 1970s, with La Cage aux Folles (Harvey Fierstein 1978) – tagline ‘une comédie très gay’ – foregrounding homosexuality, drag, and the staged performance which would inspire a 1996 Hollywood remake, The Birdcage (Mike Nichols) with both Robin Wil- liams and Gene Hackman. Before these, I Love You, I Don’t (Serge Gainsbourg 1976) portrayed a gay man attracted to a woman with an androgynous appearance. Moving forward, openly gay François Ozon, who has been making film since the nineties, frequently includes queer sexualities in his work, such as the short, A Summer Dress (1996), about a gay man’s brief encounter with a woman, satire Sitcom (1998) with both lesbian and gay male characters, and 8 Women (2002) featuring a lesbian and two bisexual women. As with other queer cinemas outlined here, France has represented AIDS on the big screen, most notably in multiple award-winning Savage Nights (Cyril Collard 1992), about a bisexual HIV+ aspiring film-maker, and his complex relationships with men and women, while the 1990s also saw an increase in LGBTQ cinema with comedic aspects, such as French Twist (Josiane Balasko 1995), about two women and a man in a ménage à trois. Complicated marital relations also come to the fore in Pédale douce (Gabriel Aghion 1996), which focuses on a gay man pretending to be married to a woman, before falling in love with his beard, and gay comedy continues with Why Not Me? (Stéphane Guisti 1999) about a group of friends coming out to their parents. Alongside blatant homosexuality, there were still films full of homoeroticism, which can be read queerly, such Claire Denis’ Beau Travail (1999). Since the millennium the representation of sexuality has become even more explicit. Baise-Moi (Virginie Despentes and Coralie Trinh Thi 2000), based on the novel of the same name by Despentes (1999), follows a sex worker and a sometime pornographic actress, who feel marginalized by society and embark on a violent rampage with lesbian undertones. A scene cut from the final edit of the film features lesbian sex. Meanwhile, Catherine Breillat’s Anatomy of Hell (2004) follows a protagonist who slashes her wrists in a gay bar, the gay man who rescues her, and the four nights he watches her when she is ‘unwatchable’, with a series of sex acts including a rake and menstrual blood. Indeed character types and themes in recent queer French cinema include hustlers, call girls and porn, such as Man at Bath (Christophe Honoré 2010) and Our Paradise (Gaël Morel 2011). Like the aforementioned trend for queer horrors, often parodic and/or gro- tesque, France released Poltergay (Éric Lavaine 2006). Furthermore, there has been a focus on the queer road movie in recent French-language cinema, as explored by Michael Gott and Thibaut Schilt in their article in this special issue. The French – and Flemish – film of Belgium is also noteworthy and played a role in the queer horror, such as the lesbian vampire film, Daughters of Darkness (Harry Kümel 1971), adapted from Joseph Sheridan LeFanu’s Carmilla (1871). Kümel’s first feature film was also queer: Monsieur Hawarden (1969), a biopic about the life of cross-dressing Meriora Gillibrand, and the theme of cross-dressing came to the fore again in Alain Berliner’s 1997 film, Ma vie en rose (My Life in Pink) about little girl Ludovic, who was assigned male at birth. French film Tomboy (Céline Sciamma 2011) would go on to recall Berliner’s film for it follows a 10-year-old assigned female at birth and named Laure, who, after moving, introduces himself to new friends in his new neighbourhood as Mikäel. Recently deceased Belgian lesbian film-maker, Chantal Akerman was widely consid- ered a leading light in experimental European and feminist cinema with her exploration of female sexuality and identity. Indeed lesbian coming of age is a key strand running through much of her work, although the narratives she creates in films such as Je, tu, il, elle (1974) and Portrait d’une jeune fille de la fin des années 60 à Bruxelles (1994) resist established binaries relating to sexual identity, instead portraying a fluidity of desire. Belgian film, too, has witnessed the relatively recent – but very different – queer trends: horror; the move towards the normalization of homosexuality; and increased transnational cinema with transcultural themes. Examples of each of these include The Ordeal (Fabrice Du Welz 2004), a psychological horror notable for a boy having sex with a pig, while normalization happens in Flemish film, North Sea Texas (Bavo Defurne 2011), about a boy in love with his male best friend. Like the young queer love of North Sea Texas, Puppylove (Delphine Lehericey 2013) features a 14-year-old girl exploring her sexuality with a female friend, including threesomes. Romantic feelings between same-sex friends come to the fore again in Mixed Kebab (Guy Lee Thys 2012), which focuses on Ibrahim, a twenty-something gay Muslim with Turkish roots, born in Belgium, and a same-sex friendship turned relationship. Notable Swiss queer cinema includes Mano Destra (Cleo Übelmann 1986), a black and white lesbian art film portraying bondage. Garçon stupide (Lionel Baier 2004) is about a young factory worker who cruises older men online and indulges in emotionless sexual encounters, while undergoing personal growth. Indeed, like many European countries, the period around the new millennium witnessed a different type of – rounded – gay characters. In As Luck Would Have It (Lorenzo Gabriele 2002), a literature profes- sor is selected to be the guardian of a teenage boy, while juggling his career and a jeal- ous boyfriend. Like much of the rest of Europe, too, there were more transnational co-productions, such as Soundless Wind Chime (Hung Wing Kit 2009) about the rela- tionship between Ricky, a Chinese man in Hong Kong, and a Swiss gay pickpocket, who later dies. Memory comes to the fore when Ricky travels to Switzerland where the present and the past are intertwined. The queer past is explored in German-language Swiss film The Circle (Stefan Haupt 2014), about a gay publication in Zurich in the 1940s and 1950s, which became a scapegoat for the murders of gay men in the city. Meanwhile, in this period Italy saw the end of a fascist regime, the execution of Benito Mussolini and the transition to a republic in quick succession, meaning a time of major change, as it was for many countries, due to the end of the Second World War. Social progress and cultural change were simultaneous as Italian neorealism arose when Mussolini’s rule ended and the film industry was without a hub. This new cinematic movement, in the 1940s and 1950s, was about the social reality of post-war Italy and began with the stories of the poor and the working class. It went on to inspire other cin- ematic movements such as the French New Wave and New German Cinema. Ossessione (Luchino Visconti 1943) is considered the first neorealist film. Openly gay Visconti would then go on to explore homosexuality, Naziism and power in The Damned (1969), the first of his ‘German Trilogy’, which includes Death in Venice (1971), about a man obsessed with an adolescent boy, and Ludwig (1973). Neorealism received international attention with Rome, Open City (Roberto Rossellini 1945), a film co-written by Federico Fellini, who later directed Satyricon (1969) about a scholar and his friend who try to win the affection of a young boy, with whom both are in love. Openly gay Pier Paolo Pasolini is said to have created films with a picaresque neorealism, as well as controver- sial work, such as the last film before his murder Salò, or the 120 Days of Sodom (1975), based on the book The 120 Days of Sodom (1785), by the Marquis de Sade and updated to the fall of Mussolini. The Conformist (Bernardo Bertolucci 1970) also explores homosexuality, fascism and the fall of Benito Mussolini with film-maker Bertolucci beginning as an assistant to Pasolini. Liliana Cavani, too, is a key name in Italian queer cinema. Like Visconti, her work includes a ‘German Trilogy’: The Night Porter (1974) a Nazisploitation film portraying a link between fascism, sexuality, and perversion, and Beyond Good and Evil (1977) about the relationship between Friedrich Nietzsche, Lou Salomé, and Paul Reé, while The Berlin Affair (1985), an Italian–German film set in war-torn Berlin, sees a wife and her Nazi diplomat husband fall in love with the same man. The 1960s and 1970s featured other Italian gay cinematic output, such as A Compli- cated Girl (Damiano Damiani 1968), about a man who listens in to a phone call between lesbians and his quest to become one of their lovers and, in keeping with sev- eral other European films of that period, Check to the Queen (Pasquale Festa Campanile 1969) centres on an actress’ sadomasochistic, homoerotic relationship. Italian director Dino Risi made a series of films exploring sexuality, such as I See Naked (1969) and How Funny Can Sex Be? (1973). Similarly, Italy was part of the supernatural lesbian film trend, with Baba Yaga (Corrado Farina 1973) about a female photographer who is controlled – through a doll, dressed in fetishwear – by a seductress with special powers. Queer Italian-French horror Blood for Dracula (1974) was directed by American Paul Morrissey and produced by frequent collaborator, Andy Warhol. Fears from the fascist past came to the fore again in Steno’s 1979 film, La patata bollente – part of Commedia all’italiana (comedy the Italian way), a label given to Ital- ian comedies in this period – in which a gay man is beaten by neo-Nazis and rescued by a man whose girlfriend then believes he has turned gay. The film discusses homo- phobia in the political left, working-class culture, and Eurocommunism. That same year, Ernesto (Salvatore Samperi 1979) explored the gay relationship between a teenage Jewish boy and a stableboy in Italy in 1911. Italian queer film of the 1980s and 1990s also refused to shy away from controver- sial topics. The Flavor of Corn (Gianni Da Campo 1986) portrays a gay romance between a man and his 12-year-old student, while Sacred Silence (Antonia Capuano 1996) follows a Catholic priest and his paedophilic relationship with a street boy. The past, too, remained in people’s consciousness with films including The Gold Rimmed Glasses (Guiliano Montaldo 1987), set in 1938, which outlines a Jewish student and a gay doctor’s persecution in Fascist Italy. Turkish–Italian director Ferzan Özpetek’s work, which is explored in more depth in an article in this issue, includes The Ignorant Fairies (2001), about a woman who dis- covers her recently deceased husband had been having an affair with a man, and Saturn in Opposition (2007) about a group of friends, straight and gay, while Loose Cannons (2010) revolves around coming out narratives. The fluidity of sexuality as demonstrated in both US and European film in recent years, such as The Ignorant Fairies, also featured in other Italian film, e.g. David’s Birthday (Marco Filiberti 2009) about the friendship between two heterosexual couples and the fallout after the men begin an affair and Different from Whom? (Umberto Carteni 2009), which shows openly gay Piero, a left-wing politician, fall for a woman during his election campaign for mayor. There has been more lesbian film in recent times, including Gasoline (Monica Stam- brini 2001), about a young lesbian couple on the run, Rosa and Cornelia (Giorgio Treves 2000), and lesbian romance Purple Sea (Donatella Maiorca 2009), while super- natural horror The Mother of Tears (Dario Argento 2007), featuring lesbian lovers, fits in with the recent trend for queer European horror. The past keeps coming to the fore in cinematic output with Il Rosa Nudo (The Naked Rose) (Giovanni Coda 2013), a film about the life of Pierre Seel, who was imprisoned by the Nazis as a teenager for being gay, but later went on to marry and have children, remaining silent about the reason for his imprisonment until the Bishop of Strasbourg’s attacks against gay people in 1982 inspired him to write his autobiogra- phy. This trend for telling queer history ties to Italian cinematic history with Pasolini (Abel Ferrara 2014), about the film-maker’s final days in which he was increasingly opposed by the Italian people due to the coupling of his homosexuality and his final film, the aforementioned Salò, or the 120 Days of Sodom. While some cinema boasts rather illustrious queer beginnings, the same cannot be said for Spain, which was ruled by dictator Francisco Franco Bahamonde from 1939 until his death in 1975 and it was only towards the end of this rule that some queer film appeared. Both lesbianism and vampirism featured in The Blood Splattered Bride (Vincente Aranda 1972), a Spanish horror film also based on Joseph Sheridan Le Fanu’s Carmilla, which simultaneously rejected fascism and depicted more progressive gender and sexuality. That same year another taboo under Franco’s regime, gender reassign- ment, was explored in black comedy My Dearest Senorita (Jaime de Armiñán), about 43-year-old Adela, who takes on the identity of Juan, moving from a small village to Madrid. Four years later, and now post-Franco, Change of Sex (Vincente Aranda 1976) depicted someone assigned male at birth who also moves to the big city, this time to live as a woman. The film features Victoria Abril, who has roles in several queer films, including aforementioned comedy French Twist, thus creating a queer intertextuality. Moving from queer gender to sexuality and a film considered to show the first extended representation of gay men in Spanish cinema, Hidden Pleasures (Eloy de la Iglesia 1977) follows a middle-aged closeted banker who falls for a straight man many years his junior. The older gay man in love with a younger one is also the basis for To an Unknown God (Jaime Chávarri 1977), in which a 50-something magician, fixated on his childhood in Grenada in 1936 and the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War, comes to terms with both his homosexuality and his mortality during an affair with a young politician. De la Igelsia also explores closeted homosexuality and the transition to democracy in El diputado (1978) about a married member of the Spanish left who desires men, with his Fascist enemies aware of this double life. Sexuality and corruption during the transition to democracy in Spain continued in 1981 with The Minister’s Wife, about a young rural waiter who prostitutes himself with older men and becomes impli- cated in terrorism, while the film gained further attention for its lesbian subplot between a wife and her female gardener. Homosexuality continues to be tied to Spanish politics in The Death of Mikel (Imanol Uribe 1984), recounting – via flashback – the story of a gay member of ETA, a Basque nationalist and separatist organization, who dies mysteri- ously. Still engaging with queer sexuality and fascism, the controversial In a Glass Cage (Augustí Villaronga 1986) concentrates on former Nazi doctor Klaus, who, after a failed suicide attempt, is nursed by a man whom he had abused as a child. In 1980, Pedro Almodóvar, the now most well-known queer Spanish film-maker, released his first feature film, Pepi, Luci, Bom and Other Average Girls, a camp comedy about a lesbian punk singer and a masochistic housewife, which is said to belong to La Movida Madrileña (The Madrilenian Scene), a period of cultural freedom and sexual exploration between the end of Franco’s regime and the onset of AIDS consciousness. Almodóvar followed this with comedy Labyrinth of Passion (1982) – in which Antonio Banderas has his filmic debut in a small role, while Penélope Cruz would go on to fea- ture in several of Almodóvar’s films – about a sex-obsessed gay popstar who falls in love with a Middle Eastern prince. Law of Desire (Almodóvar 1987) explores a love triangle between three men, while Love of a Man (Almodóvar 1997) focuses on the friendship between a gay man and a straight woman, and All About My Mother (Almo- dóvar 1999) covers delicate subjects including AIDS, homosexuality, trans status, and religion, and won an Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film. Some of these themes come to the fore again in Bad Education (Almodóvar 2004). More recently, I’m So Excited! (Almodóvar 2013), featuring both Banderas and Cruz, includes queer sexualities and practices. While Almodóvar was making a name for himself internationally, gay exploration was becoming more popular on the Spanish screen, such as in coming-of-age dramas The Lame Pigeon (Jaime de Armiñán 1995), which simultaneously explores class in 1950s Andalusia, and Nico and Dani (Cesc Gay 2000), while Second Skin (Gerardo Vera 1999) examines a heterosexual marriage in which the husband cheats with a man, and My Mother Likes Women (Inés París and Daniela Fejerman 2002), about three grown-up daughters’ responses to their mother entering a lesbian relationship. Bear Cub (Miguel Albaladejo 2004) is about a dentist who agrees to look after his nephew, which makes the bear alter his highly sexed gay lifestyle, while more normative gay lifestyles come to the fore again in Queens (Manuel Gómez Pereira 2005) about a group of men marrying in Spain’s first same-sex wedding ceremony. Recent lesbian film includes English, Spanish and Russian language Room in Room (Julio Medem 2010), while a fluidity of sexuality rather than language or culture appears in the love triangle in Sex of Angels (Xavier Villaverde 2012). Moving back in time to when Dietrich was queering film, Swedish actress Greta Garbo starred in a Hollywood biopic as the eponymous Queen Christina (Rouben Mamoulian 1933), in which she cross-dressed and declared ‘I shall die a bachelor’, although Christina’s sexuality is only hinted at via an attraction to a lady in waiting. Sweden has long been one of the most progressive countries regarding LGB rights, and is a forerunner for trans rights. The country’s film industry, too, has pushed boundaries regarding sexuality and gender, such as 491 (Vilgot Sjöman 1964), a controversial film about a group of young criminals participating in a social experiment and featuring a homosexual rape scene as well as a – cut – scene in which a woman is raped by a dog. In the 1970s, Sweden became increasingly known internationally for pornography and other sex-related films and Ingrid Ryberg’s article within this issue focuses on pornography, albeit more recent. More from the Language of Love (Torgny Wickman 1970) is a Swedish sex education film about alternative sexualities and lifestyles, while Anita: Swedish Nymphet (1973) by the same director is an erotic drama, and Thriller – A Cruel Picture (Bo Arne Vibenius as Alex Fridolinski 1973) recounts the story of a mute woman forced into heroin addiction and prostitution and her revenge on the men she holds responsible. Loving Couples (1964) deals with complex topics such as sexual repression, adultery, premarital sex, lesbianism, male homosexuality, bisexuality and paedophilia and was made by Mai Zetterling, a film-maker who was also an actress in work of the best-known Swedish director, Ingmar Bergman, whose films include Persona (1966), with a strong lesbian subtext, and Face to Face (1976), which explores the mental health of a female doctor who is interested in a man in the same profession who turns out to be attracted to other men. More recently, director Lukas Moodysson has gained international attention, notably for Show Me Love (1998) about two teenage girls who embark on a romantic relation- ship, which Anna Westståhl Stendahl claims was ‘related to the New Queer Cinema wave of the early 1990s’ (2012, 5), although it must be noted the New Queer Cinema consisted of queer works by queer directors. Moodysson’s second feature Together (2000), a comedy set in 1975 in a Stockholm commune, also includes lesbianism as well as male homosexuality and his black and white stream of consciousness film Container (2006) is also queer. In line with the transcultural and transnational trend, Ciao Bella (Mani Masserat- Agah 2007) is about a teenage football player from an immigrant Iranian family living in Sweden, who is encouraged to pass as Italian by an Italian player, Enrico. The boys’ friendship becomes a love affair. Europeanness more broadly is highlighted again in Once in a Lifetime (Susanne Bier 2000), featuring cameos by numerous Swedish sing- ers, about a mother obsessed with the – very queer – Eurovision Song Contest and who achieves fame through a song she pretends she wrote. A theme more common in earlier film, AIDS, comes to the fore again via her HIV+ brother. Patrik, Age 1.5 (Ella Lemha- gen 2008) is a comedy about a gay couple who think they are adopting a baby, but he is actually a homophobic teenager. Family complexities continue in With Every Heartbeat (Alexandra Therese Keining 2011) about Mia, engaged to a man, who falls in love with the daughter of her father’s fiancée. Most recently, Dyke Hard (Bitte Andersson 2014) has made an impact on the queer European film festival scene. The genre-bending film follows a failed lesbian rock group trying to revive their career on a trip to a Battle of the Bands competition and, along the way, parodies genres such as the horror and the road movie. Stepping back in time again, to 1959, homosexuality was officially criminalized in the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which was founded in 1943, in the aftermath of the Second World War. While the Socialist Republic of Croatia decriminalized homosexual- ity in 1975, some parts of the Federation only did this after the fall of Yugoslavia, meaning decades with a dearth of LGBT cinematic output. Since Croatia declared independence from Yugoslavia in 1991, there has been some LGBTQ film, which I will not discuss here as I have done with other national cinemas, as these are outlined, alongside the social and political reality of LGBT people, in La??an’s article in this special issue. This matter is poignant, for although there has been a significant increase in European LGBTQ film production in recent years, both mainstream and independent, this does not mean that LGBT identities are now safe in the European context, with Russia an example of a country where LGB citizens do not enjoy the same rights as heterosexual ones, while trans rights remain far behind those of cis people – those whose sex and gender are aligned – across a large proportion of Europe. It is for this reason that LGBTQ film is important; it is not just entertainment, although that is an important aspect, but also has a socio-political use delivering information about political injustices and social realities to a broader audience. Indeed film, which foregrounds visibility, can also be used as a tool for acceptance of a range of identities and can give a presence and a voice to identities which are otherwise invisible, whether through choice or fear. The temporal and spacial breadth of this introduction creates a queer space of LGBT cinematic trends that cross borders and boundaries. Indeed queer film and space is a key thread running throughout this issue, which explores film from a range of countries, including Germany (with an Iranian protagonist), Italy (featuring Turks), Croatia, Lux- embourg, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and – beyond Europe – the USA. A focus on both European unity and the queering of this is especially significant at a time when Europe, and the European Union in particular, is going through difficulties and having to make major decisions about its present and its future. Furthermore, it is a time when – decidedly unqueer – gay marriage is making headlines both in and beyond Europe. Queer temporality is woven through this issue and although the timeframe of pri- mary films analysed is a relatively narrow 16 years, from 1997 to 2012, these works draw on the queer cinematic history outlined in this introduction and, furthermore, this period from 1997 has seen huge changes regarding LGBTQ rights and the sociopolitical reality of gay lifestyles. When proposals for this special issue started to arrive, I noticed a marked focus on the intersection between LGBTQ film and queer space and place, thus enabling this issue to push forward discussion regarding LGBTQ identity and loca- tion. Furthermore, in order to continue to queer film, this collection explores films tradi- tionally belonging to ‘low culture’, such as pornography, through the spectrum to the ‘high culture’ of independent arthouse movies. Leanne Dawson’s article, which opens this special issue of Studies in European Cinema, considers not only a multi-lingual queer European film with an Asian protago- nist, Unveiled/Fremde Haut (Angelina Maccarone 2005), but also a film from beyond Europe: North American Boys Don’t Cry (Kimberly Peirce 1999), which, it has been argued, sounded the death knoll for New Queer Cinema due to its mainstream success. Dawson reads these two films alongside each other to consider how queer identity, in terms of both gender and sexuality, as well as ethnicity and socio-economic position, are controlled and regulated. Drawing on the aforementioned Halberstam text, which employs Boys Don’t Cry to posit a transgender gaze, as well as Butlerian gender perfor- mativity (1990) and Michel Foucault’s body of work on the development of Western systems of control, Dawson’s article considers how power is articulated and policing is constructed in terms of the body and relationships, before homing in on identity and medium specificity to consider sight – the filmic gaze – and the sense of touch, then finally pulling back to read these aspects alongside the political reality of socio-eco- nomic position, queerness, crime and location, before offering a new interjection relating to second cinema: arthouse and the appropriation of space. Sanja La??an also considers sociopolitical reality alongside representation, although here it is specifically lesbian representation in film at important political moments for Croatia, namely its entry into the European Union and marriage referendum, thus high- lighting two issues that are continuing to make news headlines worldwide as this journal issue goes to press. ‘Concealing, Revealing, and Coming Out: Lesbian Visibility in Dal- ibor Matani??’s Fine Dead Girls/Fine mrtve djevojke (Matani?? 2002) and Dana Budisavl- jevi??’s Family Meals/Nije ti ??ivot pjesma Havaja (Budisavljevi?? 2012)’ draws on studies of LGBT representation in post-socialist cinema, which have pointed to the problem of lesbian visibility in particular, by asserting that ‘all mainstream Eastern European films about lesbians are also national allegories and use the lesbian as a metaphor to challenge the implicitly heterosexual political institution of the nation’ (Moss and Simi?? 2011, 271). Both films examined are crucial, La??an argues, in aiding our understanding of the evolution of cinematic representations of lesbians in Croatia, just as they are for evaluat- ing the ongoing changes in public perception of queer sexualities. Departing from the notion of cinematic lesbians of the Western Balkans as mere repositories of nationalist and male discourse, this analysis pulls back to consider homophobia and hetero-sexism as socially constructed phenomena not particular to the Balkans, while illustrating the significance of anti-essentialism regarding sexuality and gender in constructing a visible lesbian subject. Also moving away from rigid concepts of nationalism, Elena Boschi examines queerness alongside transnationalism in her analysis of music and camp in Ferzan Özpetek’s films Hamam: The Turkish Bath/Hamam: il bagno turco (1997), His Secret Life/Le fate ignoranti (2001), Saturn in Opposition/Saturno contro (2007), and Loose Cannons/Mine vaganti (2010). In ‘Loose Cannons Unloaded: Popular Music, Space, and Queer Identities in the Films of Ferzan Özpetek’, Boschi explores how songs under- mine the inclusivity claimed by films featuring queer and other non-dominant identities. Drawing on Will Higbee and Song Hwee Lim (2010), Boschi proposes to think about Özpetek’s films in terms of, ‘a critical transnationalism [that] does not ghettoize transna- tional film-making in interstitial and marginal spaces but rather interrogates how these film-making activities negotiate with the national on all levels’ (2010, 18). Combining transnational film theory with Freya Jarman’s interjections on camp and popular (music) culture (2009), Boschi problematizes instances where music and spatial positioning can aurally undermine inclusive representations of queer identities and their ‘visibility’ to musically other queer characters. Location is explored in terms of embodiment in Ingrid Ryberg’s ‘The Ethics of Shared embodiment in queer, feminist and lesbian pornography’, which examines Dirty Diaries: Twelve Shorts of Feminist Porn (2009). The collection comprises a film by Ryberg herself (Phone Fuck, Sweden), as well as work by Emilie Jouvet (France), Marit Östberg (Sweden/Germany), and collectives such as girlswholikeporno (Spain) and Post- Porn (Sweden). Ryberg’s interjection belongs to a trend of reigniting discussion about les- bianism, queerness, feminism, and pornography, much like the Sex Wars did; that is the clash between anti-porn feminists and sex radical feminists in the United States, often symbolized by the infamous Barnard conference on sexuality in 1982, which represented a change to Second Wave feminism, which was notoriously anti-butch-femme and anti- S&M. Ryberg discusses how feminist pornographic film culture invites a particular ‘ethics of shared embodiment’ (Laura U. Marks 2002, 8), which is capable of accommodating heterogeneity – queer, lesbian, and feminist, although these categories frequently do over- lap – and disagreements within this film culture to argue against an essentialism about what such porn is or should be, coupling this with José Esteban Muñoz’s aforementioned work on queerness as horizon and utopia (2009), to conceptualize conflicts in a non-linear fashion, while calling for an ethics of shared embodiment. The issue then moves from the travelling protagonists of Emilie Jouvet’s Queer X Show to Michael Gott and Thibaut Schilt’s exploration of road movies. In ‘Crossing Borders and Queering Identities in French-language European Road Cinema’ Gott and Schilt focus on citizenship, cross-dressing and liminal spaces, allowing us to come full circle regarding the dominant themes discussed in relation to both Boys Don’t Cry and Unveiled in the opening piece of this special issue. Like several other articles included here, Gott and Schilt touch on the sociopolitical reality of LGBTQ identities in recent years, such as the controversies surrounding the adoption of the pacte civil de solidarité (PACS), and other debates about civil partnerships in Europe in the late 1990s, which, they argue, coincide with a revival of the road movie format in the cinema of France and its neighbours. This article homes in on three French-language, queer-themed, border-crossing road movies: Going South/Plein sud (Sébastien Lifshitz, France 2009), Made in France/Origine contrôlée (Ahmed Bouchaala and Zakia Tahri, France/Luxem- bourg 2001), and Stealth/Comme des voleurs (à l’est) (Lionel Baier, Switzerland 2006), and how the border-crossing of road movies, including the multilingualism within them, tackles the fluidity of identity and citizenship from a transnational perspective to argue that the trend for road movies in France and beyond corresponds to a period marked by identity debates and the decreasing relevance of the traditional fabric of citizenship. Boys Don’t Cry (Kimberly Peirce 1999) and Fremde Haut/Unveiled (Angelina Maccarone 2005), narrative feature films by lesbian independent filmmakers, follow ‘passing’ men who have also been read as enjoying lesbian sexual relations Award-winning Boys Don’t Cry by American Pierce is an adaptation of the true story of murdered Brandon Teena, who is presented in the film as a trans man, although, like the aforementioned lesbianism, this reading of Brandon as Pierce’s film can be examined alongside German director Maccarone’s Unveiled to consider how different types of trans masculinity are represented in Western patriarchal societies where white, heterosexual, cis men are intrinsically linked to suffer at the hands of cis men because of the supposed misalignment between their sex and gender and although this passes as an article on the cinematic representation of passing men, the underlying theme is fear and the resulting policing of borders: bodily, geographical and social. After outlining some key theoretical concepts from Queer Studies, alongside Michel Foucault’s work on the development of Western systems of control, this article will con- sider how power is articulated and policing is conducted in relation to the body and relationships. This is done via a reading of trans tropes and some of the many similari- ties of the passing protagonists in Peirce and Maccarone’s films, for Unveiled appears to build on the groundwork laid by Boys Don’t Cry. This article then homes in on identity in relation to medium specificity to consider sight – the filmic gaze – alongside the sense of touch, before finally pulling back to read these aspects with the political reality of socio-economic position, queerness, crime and location. 206 Leanne Dawson Passing and policing Passing is the misrecognition of a person as a member of a sociological group other than their own and can apply to aspects of identity such as race, ethnicity, class, gender, sexuality, religion or disability status. Critical and social understanding of passing started with ethnicity: examples include light-skinned Black people posing as white in the racially segregated USA and Jews passing as ‘Aryan’ in Nazi Germany to escape persecution. The term has since become increasingly linked to sexuality and gender: used as shorthand for passing as straight with regard to gay men and lesbians who wish to keep their sexual orientation private or simply choose to dress and act in a way that is often erroneously considered to be heterosexual. It is also used by transgender people as a strategy either to avoid negative attention or punishment for their supposed gender transgressions or out of a belief that they should be read externally in line with what they consider to be their internal gender identity. By its very definition, when certain people ‘pass’, others ‘fail’ (Bernstein Sycamore 2006, 2) and it is those who either can- not or choose not to pass, and therefore present a disruptive surface text, who have been most celebrated in queer theory, despite the fact that failing to pass can have serious socio-political consequences. Furthermore, the sometime dismissal of passing in queer theory may fail to acknowledge its use as a means of infiltration and, possibly, covert power. While Brandon in Boys Don’t Cry appears to strive to pass, ironically, because he is presented as believing he is a man, the passing in Unveiled is part of a more fluid gender display, apparently due to other external factors regarding the liminal space of (homo)sexuality and asylum. There are temporal, cultural and geographical ‘norms’ of gender and other aspects of identity, which are often incorrectly considered to be inherent or natural. Simone de Beauvoir examined the binary, which places the most powerful or normative identity in the first position, and relegates the other to second position e.g. subject–object, man– woman, Aryan–Jewish, white–black and her seminal 1949 statement, ‘one is not born, but rather becomes a woman’ ([1949] 1997, 249) is an insight into gender as a process, a socialisation into such otherness, which inspired second-wave feminism in the 1970s. Seminal queer theory text, Gender Trouble. Feminism and the Subversion of Identity (Butler [1990] 1999) built on this to unsettle established notions of gender identity, subjectivity and human agency by emphasising the body as discursive surface: gender performativity involves repetitive actions of movement, gesture, posture, labour, dress, production, interaction with objects and the manipulation of space, giving the illusionary appearance that gender is inherent. Butler uses the butch-femme lesbian couple to illuminate issues surrounding sex, gender and sexuality, reflected in the ideas about passing earlier: The replication of heterosexual constructs in non-heterosexual frames brings into relief the utterly constructed status of the so-called heterosexual original. Thus, gay is to straight not as copy is to original, but, rather, as copy is to copy. The parodic repetition of ‘the original’ [...] reveals the original to be nothing other than a parody of the idea of the natural and the original. ([1990] 1999, 41) Butler stresses the political significance of displacing traditional heterosexual practices of masculinity and femininity from their supposedly natural home on the heterosexual couple’s bodies to the lesbian couple’s bodies, and rightly argues that not just lesbian, but all identities, must be challenged. She distinguishes performance in the more literal, theatrical sense from performativity, as the former is a ‘bounded act’ with a demarcated Studies in European Cinema 207 beginning and end (1993, 234), taking the aforementioned socio-political reality into consideration: gender performances in non-theatrical contexts are governed by more clearly punitive and regulatory social conventions. Indeed, the sight of the transvestite onstage can compel plea- sure and applause while the sight of the same transvestite on the seat next to us on the bus can compel fear, rage, even violence. (1988, 527) The fact that the main characters in both films pass as men as part of their daily reality, rather than for entertainment, throws their respective environments into disarray, for gender intelligibility and unintelligibility are frequently linked to power – more so for intelligible masculinity – and powerlessness, respectively.Language, too, plays a key role in identity, ‘The doctor who receives the child and pronounces – “It’s a girl” – begins that long string of interpellations by which the girl is transitively girled’ (Butler 1997, 49). For Butler, language is ‘a performance with effects’ (1997, 7) and ‘to move out of the domain of speakability is to risk one’s status as a subject’ (1997, 133), an issue which the trans characters in both films must navi- gate, as well as being significant off-screen with naming and labels so interwoven in the social fabric that divides were created between camps (trans, lesbian etc.) who wish to appropriate and claim Brandon as one of them. Butler’s work is deeply informed by Foucault, a scholar of historiography and archives of power, whose research examines the development of Western systems of control that makes humans subjects and he goes beyond biology to consider the body as a manipulated and controlled object. In power relations, sexuality is one of the elements with the ‘greatest instrumentality’ ([1976] 1998, 103), with non-normative sexuality frequently pathologised ([1976] 1998, 105). Foucault outlines how sex/uality has been unspeakable, silenced ([1976] 1998, 6) or that which must be confessed, to a religious leader or on the psychoanalyst’s sofa ([1976] 1998, 59), instances of testimony to powerful subjects who listen and say little, there- fore knowing without revealing (Foucault [1976] 1998, 62). These also speak to sub- jects as a means of categorizing, regulating and policing norms and behaviours, although Butler is less damning here, considering the positives for the subject of these confessions e.g. the religious follower feeling closer to God and the analys and resolv- ing issues (2004, 164–165). Indeed Foucault singled out doctors, prison staff, priests, judges and psychiatrists as key figures in political configurations involving domination. In order to instill discipline, the prison, the factory and suchlike provide enclosure and partitioning, assign rank, make a clear timetable and push for the correct use of the body ensuring it does not remain idle (Foucault [1975] 1991, 141–154), so the docile body of the factory worker and the prisoner follows routine and order (Foucault: 137–138). Furthermore, these institutions have traditionally been controlled by straight, white, cis men and contained those on the second position of the binary, or outside of the supposed norm: criminals, people of colour, the poor, queers, etc. Aforementioned institutions such as the prison and the hospital employ medical and other examinations, transforming ‘the economy of visibility into the exercise of power’ (Foucault [1975] 1991, 184), and visibility is imperative, too, when considering the med- ium of film. Since Laura Mulvey’s seminal article on scopophilia and film, in which she theorised that the spectator’s ‘gaze’ is always ‘male’, regardless of gender, and woman onscreen is a spectacle of ‘to-be-looked-at-ness’ (1975, 14) to be enjoyed by this ‘male gaze’, film scholars have theorised numerous gazes. Queer theorist Halberstam uses Boys Don’t Cry to posit a trans gaze linked to queer temporality as, ‘queer uses of time and 208 Leanne Dawson space develop, at least in part, in opposition to the institutions of family, heterosexuality, and reproduction’ (2005, 1) and thus do not adhere to the linearity and repetition of a normative life schedule i.e. those with ‘queer’ lifestyles, even if their gender and sexuality are hetero-normative, such as drug addicts and club kids who live life in ‘rapid bursts’ (Halberstam 2005, 4). Indeed Halberstam claims Peirce’s film constructs ‘a transgender gaze capable of seeing through the present to a future elsewhere’ (2005, 7), beyond patriarchy’s fixation on linearity and the binary. In order to explore trans tropes in both films, some plot detail is necessary. In Boys Don’t Cry, 21-year-old Brandon Teena (Hilary Swank), assigned female at birth, leaves his hometown of Lincoln, Nebraska after problems with male authority figures: the police, angry patriarchs and other male family members of his ex-girlfriends.When he has to move out of his gay cousin Lonny’s (Matt McGrath) trailer park home, he heads to a bar, where he meets a girl named Candace (Alicia Goranson) and accepts an invitation to a party in her hometown of Falls City. He creates a new life for himself there, sharing the limited leisure and social activities open to those portrayed as unedu- cated, uncultured and relatively poor, primarily involving alcohol, violence and cars, while charming women, including Candace’s sister Lana Tisdel (Chloë Sevigny), with whom he enters into a relationship. His past, criminal and gender-related – both of which are heavily policed – catches up with him when his birthname, Teena Brandon, is listed in a local newspaper in relation to one of his crimes. Although Brandon claims this is a typographical error, suspicions had already been aroused and he is humiliated, beaten and raped by local men Tom (Brendan Sexton III) and John (Peter Sarsgaard), before being killed by the latter. Unveiled (2005) follows Iranian Fariba Tabrizi (Jasmin Tabatabai), who flees to Germany because of homophobic treatment in her homeland, where she had been hav- ing an affair with a married woman. She claims asylum for ‘political reasons’, fearful of the officials’ response to her same-sex relationship for she was mistreated by Iranian authorities in another example of the unethical policing of sexuality. She is housed in a closed reception centre at a German airport, where she befriends a man (Navíd Akha- van), who is fleeing their shared homeland due to repercussions from student political activity, and who is granted temporary asylum but commits suicide. With her asylum denied, Fariba secretly buries his body and assumes his identity: Siamak Mustafai. Fariba, passing as Siamak, is transported to Sielmingen, Swabia where s/he shares a small bedroom with a man presented as foreign and works, illegally, in a Sauerkraut factory. A dare sees work colleague Anne (Anneke Kim Samau) ask Siamak out and their gentle friendship transforms into a lesbian relationship, passing as heterosexual to everyone else diegetically, with Siamak/Fariba’s ethnic and cultural difference considered responsible for Fariba/Siamak’s style of masculinity. Their romantic relationship causes tension in the friendship group of factory work- ers, which includes Anne’s ex-boyfriend, Uwe (Hinnerk Schönemann) who, along with his best friend Andi (Jens Münchow), visits Anne unannounced and finds Fariba in the kitchen in underwear. As in Boys Don’t Cry, the cis men’s discovery of the protagonist’s secondary-sex characteristics which are marked as female leads to violence from them in a blurred combination of misogyny, jealousy and, in Unveiled, xenophobia, which may be read as homophobia. Frightened by the altercation, Anne’s son, Melvin (Leon Philipp Hofmann) telephones the police, Fariba attempts to flee, but is caught and sent back to Iran. On the plane, however, Fariba goes to the lavatory, destroys her official passport and takes another one from the sole of his/her boot, before removing the headscarf, somewhat doubling the film’s opening, to reveal masculine attire, ultimately leaving the ending and Fariba/Siamak’s gendered future open, which is in stark contrast to the finality of the passing man’s death in Peirce’s film. Both Boys Don’t Cry and Unveiled feature characters assigned female at birth who, away from ‘home’, pass as men in poor, white, small-town environments, while simulta- neously challenging patriarchal norms of gender, sexuality and nation/ality, which use covert and/or overt violence to distinguish between in- and outside, and thus maintain the binary system, and other boundaries. Although the politics of bodily boundaries play a role in Maccarone’s film, it is the im/penetrability of national borders that propels the plotline. Unveiled foregrounds (trans)nationality as well as (trans)gender issues along- side queer sexuality, while belonging and crossing in Boys Don’t Cry relate to gender and home within the nation. Writing on Unveiled, Emily Jeremiah employs Nira Yuval-Davis’ argument, ‘constructions of nationhood usually involve specific notions of both “manhood” and “womanhood”’ (1997, 1). Fariba’s Iranian background, coupled with her solid knowledge of German culture, certainly influence both gendered performances, while Brandon must display poor, rural Midwestern masculinity to be accepted by local men; indeed socio-economic position informs both protagonists’ masculinity for gender does not operate in isolation, but rather intersects with class, ethnicity and other aspects of identity. Before exploring overlapping themes and imagery, we must acknowledge the prob- lem of examining both films alongside each other as Boys Don’t Cry is based on the real-life murder of someone who is, in the media and this film, most frequently repre- sented as a murdered trans man, while Unveiled is a work of fiction which appears to be about passing for political reasons. I read Peirce’s film as representation, while acknowledging that this article adds to the archive surrounding Brandon Teena. Boys Don’t Cry made the personal political and Brandon posthumously became the unofficial poster child for both trans men and LGBTQ movements more broadly – with some claiming Teena was a stone butch whose death was a lesbian hate crime, and others declaring he was ‘someone who slipped between the cracks of available definitions’ (Halberstam and Hale 1998, 284) – partly because of the widespread attention triggered by Peirce’s film, which received numerous accolades including Hilary Swank’s Acad- emy Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role in 2000 Unveiled, too, shows the bodily consequences of dominant discourses, making the political personal as legal deci- sions are played out on Fariba’s ethnically othered body. Here, it is significant to note Peirce erased disabled Afro-American Philip DeVine, killed alongside Brandon, from her adaptation of the story, claiming the ‘sub-plot’ was too ‘cumbersome’ for Boys Don’t Cry (Halberstam 2005, 91). DeVine had previously received filmic attention in The Brandon Teena Story, Susan Muska and Gréta Olafsdóttir’s haunting 1998 docu- mentary re-telling of the killings and subsequent trial. In contrast to this avoidance of ‘cumbersome’ otherness, Unveiled was made during a trend for both transcultural and transnational film and a focus on hybridity, marginality and otherness in post-reunification German cinema. Unveiling boys: trans tropes onscreen Both trans films open with travelling protagonists and travel as a means of escape, rather than for work or leisure, is a recurring theme in Boys Don’t Cry and Unveiled. The passing protagonists are introduced not only in transit, but also escaping from authority, which will play an increasingly significant role as both films progress. Links can be drawn between boundaries, crossings and transgressions, so this section will Studies in European Cinema 209 210 Leanne Dawson examine crossing in relation to travel, then home in on crossing, sex and gender, before considering the passing men’s love interests and related transgressions. Boys Don’t Cry’s opening credits feature a police chase, for Brandon is initially speeding to impress Lana and his new friends, and then because he fears that if the police catch up with him, which they eventually do, his identity will be exposed. A scene in Unveiled echoes this one as Fariba, passing as Siamak, travels in a speeding car with new girlfriend Anne and their friends, which, like Brandon and Lana’s circle, includes a former boyfriend of the passing man’s love interest, and awareness that a police check of papers will lead to the exposure of his/her identity and subsequent expulsion from Germany. Like the speeding scene in Boys Don’t Cry, Siamak’s papers are checked but, like Brandon, s/he avoids arrest and exposure for now, while highlight- ing the fear of being uncovered in both films. Transit is also foregrounded from the out- set in Unveiled, which opens with Fariba, wearing a headscarf and dark sunglasses, fleeing her homeland by aeroplane. When an announcement in Farsi, her mother tongue, alerts passengers that they have left Iranian airspace, and women start to remove their veils, Fariba goes to the lavatory, removes and wets her headscarf, before covering the smoke alarm with the damp cloth to enjoy an illicit cigarette, escaping the cultural and religious policing of gender in her homeland and beyond. Fariba’s hair is foregrounded again later in the film: long-haired and unveiled, she disappears from her room at the holding centre immediately before she is to be sent back to Iran, then the film cuts to the back of a short-haired man, who we learn is Far- iba, now passing as Siamak, as a female officer grants the latter asylum. Focus is placed on Brandon’s hair too, with less visual impact, for Brandon is a man from the film’s outset and his transgenderism is presented as more rigid and essentialised than Fariba/ Siamak’s fluidity. Immediately after the speeding scene, Boys Don’t Cry cuts to a trailer- park home as a disembodied voice repeats ‘shorter’, only to be told it is ‘short enough’, before showing Brandon examining himself in a mirror after a haircut by Lonny. Admir- ing his handiwork, Lonny says ‘if you was a guy I might wanna fuck you’ to which Brandon quick-wittedly responds, ‘you mean if you was a guy’, both asserting his mas- culinity and pointing to stereotypes of the effeminate gay man. This is also highlighted shortly afterwards when Lonny gives Brandon style advice about his cowboy hat and checked shirt for a date at the roller rink, with both outfit and location signaling rural, blue-collar Americana. Lonny’s comment simultaneously emphasises location, geograph- ical and socio-economic, via the non-standard subject-verb agreement. In Michelle Cliff’s work on passing, ethnicity and sexuality, she claims ‘passing demands quiet. And from that quiet – silence’ (1985, 22), and Brandon and Siamak certainly employ silence, or withhold information at times, to pass as men, but in the aforementioned instance language also betrays socio-economic position. Unlike queers Brandon and Lonny, Fariba/Siamak code-switches between Farsi, German, and English, with this and other ‘cultural capital’ (Bourdieu 1986, 47) opening up the possibility of operating along a spectrum. Indeed Unveiled’s opening and closing scenes, with Fariba on a plane, show greater movement than Brandon who is always firmly lodged in blue-collar America. Underneath the gendering of the haircut, the biological body is highlighted during menstruation sequences in both films. Brandon discovers he is menstruating when he wakes in Falls City. He washes his jeans in Candace’s bathroom sink before borrowing her car to drive to the local gas station where he steals feminine hygiene products signaling both his relative poverty and his need to pass. Brandon’s discomfort with his body is not only demonstrated via a shot of his facial profile, showing visible pain during tampon insertion, but also when he hides the applicator tubes under his mattress, which will eventually betray him when Candace searches his room. Despite biological sex being brought to the viewers’ attention, the film’s narrative frequently foregrounds Brandon’s self-identity over the reality of his body, although the spectator has the privileged position, in both films, of knowing about the protagonists’ sexed bodies while those they encounter onscreen may or may not find out. Siamak/Fariba’s own search for tampons does not demonstrate unease with biology, but rather a fear of deportation if this is uncovered. While hunting for feminine hygiene products in Anne’s bathroom, s/he is asked by Melvin, who suddenly appears at a window, ‘what are you doing with Mommy’s tampons?’. Quick-wittedly, Fariba/Siamak responds that they are submarines. In contrast to Brandon’s fearful and hasty washing of blood-soiled clothing in a bath- room sink, Unveiled cuts to a close-up of a sink filled with tampons floating in water in a humorous scene that makes Anne laugh as Melvin and Fariba/Siamak bond through play. The bathroom is repeatedly highlighted as a site of difficulty for the trans subjects in both films and, according to Halberstam, the public lavatory is the archetypal place of gender policing (1998, 20). The bathroom at the Sauerkraut factory, although apparently unisex, is an especially dangerous setting with the potential to expose Fariba/ Siamak’s biological sex and when s/he converses with Anne there, Uwe creeps up from behind, grabs his/her shoulder and pretends to be an official checking up on illegal workers. Here, the bathroom is a site of secrets, truth and lies, although there are also positive occurrences. Fariba and the original Siamak’s friendship began in the lavatory at the holding centre, where Fariba discloses the real reason s/he is seeking asylum, because of her sexuality, to both Siamak and the viewer. After Brandon is raped by Tom and John and is sent to the bathroom to ‘get cleaned up’, he uses the bathroom window to escape from his attackers. The bathroom is usually a relatively private space in which one is not observed but, for the trans subject, it is where sex and gender collide and, when under suspicion or surveillance, recalling Foucault, it becomes a place in which norms are policed and categories maintained. It is not only genitalia associated with female-ness but also secondary sex character- istics such as breasts, which cause problems in both films as the clothed body’s most visible sign of femaleness. Breast un/binding scenes expose the body of the trans pro- tagonists and reveal to the unversed viewer how the flattened chest is achieved. In Boys Don’t Cry, Brandon’s breast binding occurs when he prepares for his day alone. After the aforementioned tampon insertion, there is a cut to a towel on Brandon’s bed, on which he arranges crotch padding including socks and the dildo used for packing, that is representing the bulge of the penis when clothed, and penetration of his lovers, with this plasticity somewhat counteracting the notion of the docile body. He binds his breasts with medical bandages, dons a white t-shirt and y-front underpants, arranges the prosthetic penis, styles his hair, then looks in the mirror and says ‘I’m an asshole’. This flippant comment draws attention to the anus and may further queer Brandon when con- sidered alongside the gay male sex alluded to in the earlier dialogue between Brandon and Lonny; when read alongside John, Tom and others labelling Brandon a ‘faggot’, an instance of name calling which may constitute the subject in a subordinate position (Butler 1997, 18); Tom and John later penetrating him anally; and when juxtaposed with the dildo, ‘an equal opportunity accessory’ that is ‘“queer” not because it is part of gay or lesbian sex but because it doesn’t respect the distinctions of a hetero/homosexual dichotomy’ (Reich 1999, 261). Aside from packing and binding, Brandon’s dressing scene has many similarities to that of a cis man, highlighting that the cultural Studies in European Cinema 211 212 Leanne Dawson construction of masculinity does not require maleness and that all gender performativity requires preparation, ‘tools’, and props in order to perform it correctly (Butler [1990] 1999, 185), thus queering the notion of inherent gender. Although Brandon binds alone, an unbinding is later undertaken by a nurse after he is raped, and before it is implied he allows Lana to interact with his genitalia for the first time. Unveiled features two breast unbindings: the first happens when Fariba gets undressed at the holding centre in order to shower, nocturnally, so that her identity is not discovered, echoing Halberstam’s ‘bathroom problem’. However, in the second, she is not alone: Anne exposes Fariba’s breasts, to herself and the viewer, before they make love for the first time. Anne’s lack of surprise, coupled with her eagerness to interact with Fariba’s body, implies that Fariba has ‘come out’ as a woman – or at least as a passing man – to Anne off-camera, demonstrating a fluidity of female sexuality as friendship becomes a queer relationship. Here, lesbianism is somewhat normalised, while other intersections of identity, such as ethnicity and class, are portrayed as responsible for negative difference. It has been claimed that Unveiled only becomes a lesbian film in the context of distribution and reception (Lewis 2010, 432), but I argue that Fariba/Siamak’s confes- sion of a relationship with a married woman when passing as a man, her declaration of sexuality to Siamak, and the sex scene with Anne demonstrate this is not the case: Unveiled is a queer film open to both lesbian and trans readings. Indeed Fariba does not reject homosexuality as Brandon does. The sex scenes in both films after the respective love interests become aware that their partners were assigned female at birth are loving and tender, resorting to a somewhat second-wave feminist cliché of lesbianism and other forms of queerness as mutual, reciprocal and an escape from the power and violence of heteropatriarchy. These scenes also show that the women previously presented as hetero- sexual, although they too may have been passing, are open to something new, some- thing foreign, something queer, in which what they feel (emotionally and physically) is more important than what they see and what can be measured and categorised. A motif of touch, the Hand of Fatima pendant is worn by Fariba/Siamak throughout Unveiled. It is usually donned for protection, as a sign of femininity, or as a nod to Arabian culture, while Lana points to religion with her dual cross pendants. When Anne notices the jewellery in the bathroom at work, the site of significant moments including gender policing and emotional bonding, and asks what it means, she likens Fariba/ Siamak’s hand to the female one represented in the pendant. After Brandon and John fight a man at a bar on the night they meet, John examines Brandon’s hands for injury, commenting on how small they are, and in both films we witness the passing protago- nists having their fingerprints taken for identification with the dossier of information used to make policing easier. Attention paid to digits uses the delicate hand as a meto- nym for the biologically female body, while also highlighting their other otherness, both ethnic (Fariba/Siamak and the Hand of Fatima) and socio-economic (Brandon and the fist fight). Furthermore, penile penetration is repeatedly deemphasised via this focus on hands. When Anne reveals the scar from her caesarian section, Fariba, passing as Siamak, asks if she can still feel it, to which Anne responds that no man has ever asked that before, implying they were more interested in penetrating her vagina, the Freudian bleeding wound of castration, than the abdominal scar resulting from penetration and childbirth. Fariba, a translator by profession, is repeatedly portrayed as more interested in language and touch than the aesthetic, and this command of several languages places a focus on the mouth area which, when read alongside the recurring hand motif, alludes to lesbian sex over penile penetration. Biological sex is clearly not of primary importance to Lana or Anne, positing their fluidity against the rigidity of the cis men in both films, who place a great deal of worth on sex, both intercourse and biological, and use these to gain control. Boys Don’t Cry and Unveiled show that life as a working-class woman with an intersection of identities that are located on the second position of the binary results in mistreatment and exploitation at the hands of cis men. Lana and Anne demonstrate many similarities beyond wanting to escape their respective misogynistic small-town environments, for they take an interest in the outsider, are seemingly unhappy with their own lives, and are employed as manual labourers: Lana at the spinach-packing plant and Anne at the Sauerkraut factory. In their factories, Boys Don’t Cry’s Lana and Unveiled’s Anna wear hygiene hats, tabards, and work shoes, presenting a femininity unlike the traditional glamour of the lead woman, that is the spectacle of ‘to-be-looked-at-ness’ (Mulvey 1975, 14) to be consumed by the male gaze, with the exception of Lana’s long red nails, which remain improbably immaculate throughout, and her brief time as an onstage spectacle, for both diegetic audience and the viewer, when singing karaoke. When Brandon shows a picture of Lana to Lonny, asking ‘isn’t she beautiful?’, his cousin responds with ‘if you like white trash’. Despite interactions between both Lana and Brandon and Anna and Fariba/ Siamak being portrayed positively, the films, unfortunately, seem to indicate that the passing men enter into relationships with supposedly straight women because of the women’s socio-economic location: poor, uneducated and not traditionally beauti- ful/groomed enough – the latter also dependent on both time and money – to be with a ‘real’ man who treats them well. Touching moments: Identity and the gaze After highlighting trans tropes and the interplay between gender identity and biology in both films, it is now time to explore this apparent biological reality alongside fantasy, including the senses of sight and touch and how these are privileged differently by the cis men and the passing men’s partners, respectively. Director Maccarone claims Anne’s aforementioned unbinding of Fariba’s breasts is not rendered dramatic onscreen in order to avoid clichés and prevent distancing between spectator and character, ‘Anne falls in love with Siamak/Fariba. Her hesitation due to the fact she learns she actually fell in love with a woman seems petty when she is faced with the threat of Fariba’s deporta- tion’. Indeed we only ever see Fariba and Anne make love as two women while pass- ing as a heterosexual couple to everyone onscreen, unlike an inebriated Lana, who glimpses Brandon’s cleavage as he, passing as a cis man, penetrates her with a (pros- thetic) penis. The sequence continues with Lana paying close attention to Brandon’s clothed penis and stroking his hairless chin. This, like all love-making scenes in the film, takes place outdoors in nature, escaping the aforementioned sites and institutions of patriarchal power highlighted by Foucault: the factory and the prison, as well as the home where Brandon is sexually assaulted. Somewhat problematising this, Brandon’s rape does, however, also occur outdoors. When discussing the night with Candace and Kate (Alison Folland), Lana recounts being made love to by Brandon, before adding a fictional element: that they got naked and went swimming afterwards, making clear to the viewer that she is aware Brandon has breasts, but buys into Brandon’s Butlerian fantasy. According to Butler: Fantasy is not the opposite of reality; it is what reality forecloses, and, as a result, it defines the limits of reality, constituting it as its constitutive outside. The critical promise of Studies in European Cinema 213 214 Leanne Dawson fantasy, when and where is exists, is to challenge the contingent limits of what will and will not be called reality. Fantasy is what allows us to imagine ourselves and others otherwise; it establishes the possible in excess of the real; it points elsewhere, and when it is embod- ied, it brings elsewhere home. (2004, 29) This fantasy of Brandon, in which Lana participates, not only to pass as a cisgender man in the present, but to re-imagine the past and fantasise about the future, sometimes operates outside of the policing, control, discipline and institutions of heteropatriarchy, much like the relationship between Fariba/Siamak and Anne, and may point towards a heterotopia. Furthermore, the privileging of feeling (physical and emotional) over other senses opens up a spectrum of possibilities for both Anne and Lana. It becomes clear that Lana not only challenges the limits of reality along with Brandon, but also wants to protect him, much like Anne protects Fariba/Siamak and becomes part of his/her fantasy in public. When Lana collects Brandon from the police station, he invents stories to explain why he is being held in a cell for women, begin- ning with a tale of overcrowding and progressing to one, which he vows is true, about being a ‘hermaphrodite’, evoking the intersex subject to whom Butler makes reference in her argument that sex is as constructed as gender and there are more than two sexes (2004, 66), but those born with both male and female sex organs or characteristics are operated on to fit into one of the two categories: male or female. Brandon, however, appears desperate when making such claims in the film, which adheres to a reading of the filmic representation of Brandon as a trans man. Brandon’s employment of this excuse while behind bars is interesting because ‘for a long time hermaphrodites were criminals [...] since their anatomical disposition, their very being, confounded the law that distinguished the sexes and prescribed their union’ (Foucault [1976] 1998, 38). Lana responds to Brandon ‘shut up, that’s your business. I don’t care if you’re half monkey or half ape, I’m getting you out of here!’.John and Lana’s mother will eventually find The Uninvited Dilemma (Stuart 1986), a book about trans identities, in Lana’s room, showing she is much more knowing and accepting than her friends and family. Fantasy occurs throughout Unveiled, too, and it has been argued that Maccarone’s film challenges masculinist scopophilia by emphasizing touch (Jeremiah 2011, 588), thus replacing the need to see with the will to feel, in both senses. Foucault theorised the medical gaze which is used to diagnose the patient and ‘embraces more than is said by the word “gaze” alone. It contains within a single structure different sensorial fields’ of sight, touch and hearing (1973, 164) and is ‘bound up with a certain silence’ that enables the observer/clinician to listen (1973, 107). The relationships between the pass- ing men and their respective love interests in both films are presented as somewhat removed from the power structures theorised by Foucault and foreground touch and feelings over sight and patriarchal logic, although not to categorise or diagnose as both the Foucaudian gaze and most other characters onscreen try to. Instead, for Lana and Anne, to feel (in both senses) is to know, which is positive for their respective relation- ships, while problematically adhering to the negative binary of women foregrounding emotion and men privileging logic. Indeed, the cis men are fixated on categories and measurement, although their employment in manual labour, or lack thereof, and socio- economic position disempowers them, on a larger scale at least, and instead they aim to control their social circle, rather than society at large. It is clear, however, that such cis men, alongside medical examiners, police officers and immigration officials are invested in the medical gaze and the administrators of its validity. While the foreign/strange skin of Unveiled’s original title evokes touch, its English name points towards another sense: sight, alongside cultural and religious connotations of the veil, and Boys Don’t Cry is a declarative or an imperative on the gendered demonstration of feelings. In Unveiled’s speeding scene outlined earlier, Uwe watches Anne and Fariba/Siamak interact in the back of the car through the rear-view mirror, rather than focusing on the road ahead. He breaks hard and without warning, his response betraying his feelings – boys don’t cry – while jolting the pair forward and juxtaposing his look with Anne and Fariba/Siamak’s feelings, both emotional (mutual affection) and physical (the excitement, sexual and other, and the pain caused by the jolt). This recalls an earlier scene when Fariba is driven to the reception centre at Frankfurt airport by a white male official, who makes her feel awkward in an already uncomfortable situation when he adjusts his rear-view mirror to look at her, then read- justs it for a better view of her breasts. After initially meeting his look, she dons her sunglasses and focuses out of the window and, although she refuses to actively indulge his objectification, she neither visually nor verbally challenges this, knowing her future in Germany depends on being compliant. Here the look of the powerful (a white, male official) at the relatively powerless (an asylum-seeking Iranian woman) may be com- bined with the Mulveyan cinematic gaze in order to gain pleasure from the sight of woman, with power exploited here to both sexualise and intimidate, although she is not presented as a feminine spectacle throughout. Building on theories of the cinematic gaze, Halberstam claims that Boys Don’t Cry relies on ‘the successful solicitation of affect – whether it be revulsion, sympathy or empathy – in order to give mainstream viewers access to a transgender gaze’ and sug- gests that a ‘relatively unknown actor pulls off the feat of credibly performing a gender at odds with the sexed body even after the body has been brutally exposed’ (2005, 77). I argue that Unveiled also solicits viewer empathy through revulsion (the representation of the German cis men) and sympathy or empathy (for the foreigner and the queer). Halberstam’s argument, based on queer temporality, states that Peirce’s film constructs ‘a transgender gaze capable of seeing through the present to a future elsewhere’, helped by certain ‘experimental moments in this otherwise brutally realistic film’ in which the director creates ‘slow-motion or double-speed time warps’ (2005, 77). Although Unveiled does not engage in such film trickery, Fariba/Siamak’s fluidity may make use of the transgender gaze and a fantastic future is ever-present via the plotline and protagonist, who employs passing to build the life s/he wants, while helping Anne to envision a happier life elsewhere. When we: ‘see’ the transgender character, then, we are actually seeing cinematic time’s sleight of hand. Visibility, under these circumstances, may be equated with jeopardy, danger, and exposure, and it often becomes necessary for the transgender character to disappear in order to remain viable. The transgender gaze becomes difficult to track because it depends on complex relations in time and space between seeing and not seeing, appearing and disap- pearing, knowing and not knowing. (Halberstam 2005, 78) This resonates, too, with Butlerian fantasy, Foucault’s work on monitoring, examining and classifying, as well as with theories of passing. Halberstam claims that the transgen- der gaze is achieved in order for the viewer to look with the transgender character, rather than at him (2005, 78). When John and Tom strip Brandon, as outlined shortly, Lana tells them she will have a look at his genitalia and report back. Instead, Brandon and Lana ‘sit on a bed together, the camera follows Lana’s gaze out into the night sky, Studies in European Cinema 215 216 Leanne Dawson a utopian vision of an elsewhere into which she and Brandon long to escape’ (2005, 87). Here, Lana remains part of Brandon’s fantasy by avoiding the examination foregrounded by men in order to classify, where ‘Sex is placed by power in a binary system: licit and illicit’ (Foucault [1976] 1998, 83), and such cinematically fantastical shots contrast with both the gritty realism of the setting beyond the bedroom and the violent subject matter. The scene in which it is implied Lana interacts with Brandon’s genitalia, however, is devoid of such trickery, aside from the cut between the start of their love-making and the post-sex cuddle, which is not fully in line with the transgen- der gaze, perhaps resulting in readings of this as an elided lesbian sex scene.  The visual returns to the fore in Unveiled when Fariba has her mugshot taken, the onscreen photographic act highlighting her femaleness as she is recorded in pictures by members of authority, recalling the Foucauldian dossier of information kept on individu- als, populations and suchlike, before the film cuts to an official donning gloves and Fariba bending over with a pained expression on her face as she undergoes an internal examination. This visual representation of discomfort as her vagina is violated recalls Brandon’s facial expressions as he is penetrated by a tampon and, later, a penis during the harrowing rape. Boys Don’t Cry also features a mugshot sequence in a uniformed, white, cis, male space of authority when Brandon is arrested and scrutinised simultane- ously by onscreen officials, as well as both the diegetic photographic camera and the cinematic camera, and the viewers’ gaze as we watch the final product filmed on the latter. Photographs are a source of concern for some trans subjects, for they may be part of the Foucauldian dossier of information and may reveal a differently gendered past. Indeed, Siamak/Fariba burns a picture of her and her former lover, Shirin, in order to destroy evidence of a past life, while Brandon is keen to capture Lana on film to have a memento of his present one, but later burns photographs of himself after he is raped. In both films, photographs are used to identify criminal misconduct and/or police national borders, but where border controls once focused on the visual image, via the passport or national identity card, border security is increasingly reliant upon biometrics, simpli- fying the identification of those who attempt to change their gender, style or to pass. The events of 9/11 altered approaches to border security and, although unspoken, no doubt contribute to the fear of the foreign body, even beyond high security sites such as the airport, in Unveiled. Returning to both the visual and the fantastic in Boys Don’t Cry, John and Tom want to strip Brandon to reveal what they consider to be the ‘truth’, but Lana orders him to ‘Button up your pants, don’t show me anything! Think about it, I know you’re a guy’, based on what she felt, emotionally and physically, instead of what she saw, contribut- ing to fantasy rather than adhering to the strict binary logic of the cisgender men. Her awareness of both binary and patriarchal logic, however, results in her stating, in the presence of the men, ‘Mom, I seen him in full flesh, I seen it, I know he’s a man’, before her mother (Jeanetta Arnette) calls her a ‘little liar’. The men take Brandon to the bathroom – problematic site – and, using linguistic and physical violence, pull down his trousers and underpants before Tom digitally penetrates his vagina. This aggressive ‘examination’, employing sight and touch, allows Tom to decide what kind of body Brandon has, whether it is monstrous or normalised (Foucault [1975] 1991, 184–187). Lana, her hands covering her eyes – with her touch once again used to de-emphasise the visual, at the moment Tom employs both touch and sight – has her face forced in front of Brandon’s vagina but shouts ‘Leave him alone! Leave him alone!’. Here, the bathroom is simultaneously a negative and a positive space, for it is where Brandon’s assigned sex is unveiled, and where Lana’s pronoun choice has the opposite effect of the investigatory or wounding words used by others in Brandon’s life. This juxtaposi- tion triggers somewhat of an out of body experience for Brandon, in slow-motion, as he watches himself with Lana, highlighting how pivotal it is that Lana still accepts him and buys into his fantasy even when confronted with the aesthetic reality of his biologi- cal body. Here, to speak is to reveal that Lana is part of Brandon’s fantasy and language becomes a positive tool. The medical profession correlated the gaze and language, resting ‘on the formidable postulate: that all that is visible is expressible, and that it is wholly visible because it is wholly expressible’ (Foucault 1973, 115), but neither Bran- don nor Lana buy into this, while Lana’s mother will refer to Brandon as ‘it’, therefore dehumanising him, after her discovery of his assigned sex. Confusion had also occurred earlier in the film when Brandon is referred to as both a ‘fucking dyke’ and a ‘fucking faggot’ by angry male family members of a woman he dated. This sequence of events culminates in a brutal rape scene, in which John and Tom take turns to beat and penetrate Brandon, and it is implied that after this rape Lana interacts with Brandon’s genitalia for the first time. Lana’s sexual exploration may be said to echo Maccarone’s argument, outlined earlier, that Fariba’s biological sex seems a small matter to Anne when confronted with the idea Fariba will be deported and sub- jected to ill-treatment in her homeland and that the pair may never see each other again. It appears that the traumatic events at the hands of cis men make Brandon’s biological sex even less relevant to Lana than it had been, while simultaneously becoming very relevant; she wants to interact with Brandon’s body to make him ‘feel’ as good as he makes her feel, in a problematic scene that undermines Brandon’s previous narrative. Indeed, Lana had previously told him ‘I wanna touch you the way you touch me’, to which Brandon replies, ‘soon, I promise’, with the futurity implying that he was not yet ready to be touched sexually. This rape scene is also pivotal with regard to our reading of John, Tom and their class, as well as John’s mental state (Tom: ‘doctors say he [John] got no impulse control’ and Kate to Brandon and friends during one of John’s previous outbursts: ‘welcome to the psycho ward’), with the reference to the mental institution recalling Foucauldian systems of control. Furthermore, as Foucault outlines, punishment for crime in some of the Western world, although the Death Penalty still remains in several US states including Nebraska where Brandon was murdered, moved from the spectacle of torture often resulting in death with an audience – which echoes the cinema audience’s love of looking – to torture within the privacy of an institution without an audience, to the supposedly more enlightened and humane discipline and punishment of the prison sentence, which was considered to be the middle ground between death and a light pen- alty (Foucault [1975] 1991, 115). These shifts changed the body-punishment relation by ensuring physical pain is no longer the constituent element of the penalty (Foucault [1975] 1991, 11). Criminality and possible incarceration are interwoven throughout characters’ lives in Boys Don’t Cry, although John and Tom clearly opt for lawless (sex- ual) corporeal punishment for Brandon’s gender ‘crime’, simultaneously creating a spec- tacle, for one watches while the other rapes him and then they switch, in order to penalise and regulate Brandon’s supposed transgressions, resulting in their self-imposed death penalty as the ultimate punishment. The rape sequence is intercut with Brandon providing testimony to the police, recalling the Foulcauldian confession outlined earlier, while the male officer poses inappropriate questions and statements (‘where did he try to pop it in first then?’, ‘I can’t believe he [...] didn’t stick his hand in you or his finger in you’) ensuring the viewer has both a visual account of the rape accompanied by oral testimony, with our senses of sight and hearing both playing pivotal roles. Studies in European Cinema 217 218 Leanne DawsonClass, community and, criminality After considering the senses (sight, touch and hearing) and character perception, it is important to think more about the bigger picture and character location: geographical, temporal, and economic, and implications of these, such as socialisation and political and cultural reality – for ethnicity and socio-economic position play a significant role in gender performativity – to explore violence and criminality alongside the fantasy of elsewhere to consider the power available to the socio-economically underprivileged. As each film progresses violently, it becomes increasingly clear why Lana and Anne fall for the tender strangers, especially as both love interests had previously dated chau- vinist and aggressive locals. Immediately after Unveiled’s police chase, the women and Melvin are taken to the supposed safety of home by the police officers, although this home will be the site of brutal violence when Uwe and Andy uncover Siamak/Fariba’s secret. This police intervention leaves Andy, Uwe and Siamak/Fariba to find their own way back in the car. Although the Iranian attempts to walk off from the German machos to take the bus, the latter force Siamak to accompany them to a local city. This city appears cosmopolitan when juxtaposed with the predominantly rural setting of the film, via Fariba/Siamak/the viewer’s glimpses, through the car window, of a kebab shop called ‘Istanbul’, an ‘American Tabledance’ strip club and two men kissing openly on the street. The trio’s destination is a brothel, a site of financial/sexual transaction which, along with the mental institution, was long considered a place of tolerance for illegitimate sex- ualities (Foucault [1976] 1998, 4). It is in the brothel that Andy expresses his anxiety about his girlfriend, Sabine’s (Nina Vorbrodt) disinterest in sex. Rather than comforting or reassuring his friend, Uwe alludes to his previous sexual contact with Sabine, stating that she was not like that when they were together. Andy responds with violence – again, boys don’t cry – but Fariba/Siamak calms the situation down as s/he blames the problem on hormones, adding that s/he has a sister to justify this knowledge of the female body in the absence of medical expertise. In Boys Don’t Cry, John similarly tries to stimulate Brandon’s jealousy when he speaks of knowing Lana since she was very young (‘the stories I could tell’), before adding that that there is not ‘a better man I could give her to than you’ highlighting how women are regarded as ‘objects of exchange’ (Irigaray 1985, 170) to be made use of by the cis men with little other capi- tal, economic, cultural or otherwise (Bordieu 1986) in both films. After the discussion of Sabine’s lack of interest in sex in Unveiled, Uwe pays a prostitute to have sex with ‘our Mexican friend’, further illuminating his ignorance and xenophobia, but the sex-worker, more astute than the men, notices that Fariba is female when they enter the private room and states she does not have sex with women. At Fariba/Siamak’s request, they talk to pass the time and avoid arousing the men’s suspicions. Beyond the confines of the brothel, cis men in both films mistreat, make use of, and exchange women between them, often criminally, and women are sometimes complicit in this. After the rape in Boys Don’t Cry, Lana’s mother tells John ‘if you did anything, or anything happened in that room, you get it cleaned up’, to which he replies, ‘if I wanted to rape somebody I got Mallory’, making the gentleness of the passing protago- nists especially attractive, because John’s response about sexually assaulting the mother of his child is alarming. It is, then, hardly a surprise that the passing men are viewed by their girlfriends as a symbol of a much desired elsewhere, even before both Lana and Anne discover the assigned sex of their respective boyfriends and buy into their fantasies. Lana expresses her dislike of the small town of Falls City and, listening to Brandon recount the places he has been and is going to, unaware that this is both fiction and fantasy, decides to accompany him. These plans begin as a dreamy wish to visit Memphis, appearing to solidify when the couple prepares to leave for Brandon’s home- town of Lincoln the day after the rape. Unveiled, too, turns into a love story between a stranger and a woman dreaming of elsewhere; Anne shows an interest in Fariba/Siamak’s homeland and recounts how she had previously left her hometown when she was 17 but had to return after she split up with her musician boyfriend. Fariba reassures her that she can leave again in the future, encouraging her to turn her dream into a reality, which is especially poignant as Fariba/Siamak’s own escape from home is not going as planned and her contact with Iran, via letter and telephone, is a highly fictionalised account of her life in Germany. Where the routine of the factory, much like the discipline of the prison, aims to produce ‘subjected’ and ‘docile’ bodies, which adhere to rules (Foucault [1975] 1991, 137–138), outside of the factory the working class in both films aim to take control of their bodies via the undisciplined pleasure of alcohol and, in the case of Lana, drugs, as well as illicit sex, pointing to both queer temporality and fantasy. Belonging is key within Boys Don’t Cry and Unveiled. Brandon and Fariba, passing as Siamak, display not only masculinity but the masculinity employed by the locals in their new hometowns, just as Fariba had presented the image of the veiled woman that was expected of her in Iran. Fariba/Siamak undertakes illicit work in the factory in order to earn money, placing the Iranian body into an incredibly German setting and the location among the production of a stereotypically German product highlights the con- structedness of Germanness (Jeremiah 2011, 595) and of gender. Indeed constructions, and the policing, of gender depend on location: socio-economic; temporal; and national. This is highlighted by Fariba’s removal of the veil when she leaves Iranian airspace, implying she wore it for cultural rather than religious reasons in her homeland. The veil is, however, a relatively common sight in German public space, primarily due to the high Turkish population: those guest workers who did not return to Turkey, but rather settled in Germany and sent for their families after helping to rebuild the country after the Second World War. For poor, white, uneducated Brandon, fitting in means acting more macho, but Fariba must perform Iranian masculinity in order to pass as such, while echoing just enough machismo of the German, low-status, cis men to be accepted by factory colleagues. Fariba’s plurality, in terms of language, location, employability, gender and so on, can be plotted against the singularity of Brandon, who speaks one language, never travels beyond his home state, and appears rigidly fixed on his mas- culinity, which flows between the gentlemanliness that ensures his success with women and a so-called ‘white trash’ masculinity in the presence of male friends in order to be read as a ‘norm’, although criminality pervades. Peirce and Maccarone’s films repeatedly demonstrate how difficult it is to be accepted within established communities as the stranger creates fear and distrust. Jere- miah claims that Unveiled ‘celebrates transnational exchange, suggesting that nations are not static and impenetrable’ (2011, 588), although Fariba’s arrival, request to remain in Germany, and subsequent deportation highlight how borders are rigidly maintained. Relatedly, Siamak/Fariba and Brandon’s attempts to be included, at all costs, in small town communities, show the lengths the stranger must go to in order to be accepted in a homogeneous space. Significantly, both Brandon and Fariba undertake a reverse migration, for Brandon hails from the city of Lincoln, capital of Nebraska, with a popu- lation of 191,972 according to the 1990 Census, one of many ways Foucault argues that a population is monitored ([1976] 1998, 25) with sex at the juncture between the body and population (Foucault [1976] 1998, 147), because of its reproductive function. Studies in European Cinema 219 220 Leanne Dawson Brandon makes his home for the majority of the film 70 miles away in the small town of Falls City (Lonny: ‘that’s not even on the map’ and ‘they hang faggots down there’), with a population of only 4769 residents during the same 1990 Census, recorded closest to the time the real-life Brandon actually lived there. Fariba is from Tehran, and a dia- logue between her and Anne reveals that the population is around ten million, which Anne compares to a city like New York, and this is rendered especially poignant as their conversation takes place while picking cabbages in a field located next to an airport runway; a rural setting with a constant visual and aural reminder of the world beyond the boundaries of their lives and the borders of Germany. Rural is key here as the North American term ‘white trash’ is a reference to ‘actually existing white people living in (often rural) poverty’, referring to ‘a set of stereotypes and myths related to the social behaviors, intelligence, prejudices, and gender roles of poor whites’ (Newitz and Wray 1996, 7). The juxtaposition of the terms ‘white’ and ‘trash’ is an interesting one, because white is usually considered the domi- nant norm, while trash is linked to the second position of the binary and to the abject: people of colour, the poor, the uneducated, queers and suchlike. Although problematic, the term ‘white trash’ – along with its ‘red neck’ counterpart – is the only time that white people are racialised, for white is both the dominant norm and the default position on the white-black binary and whiteness is rendered visible when it intersects with another identity in the second position of the binary: poverty, but it is also important to remember that this whiteness and poverty, just like any and all intersections of identity, play a significant role in gender performativity. Both Boys Don’t Cry and Unveiled contribute to the stereotypes and myths about poor white people, with the latter showing that elements of ‘white trash’ exist far beyond North American borders, for even Anne calls her social circle of friends/work colleagues and her ex-boyfriend ‘pathetic hicks’ and ‘primitive’, although it must be noted that these comments do not have the racial marker that ‘white trash’ has, but rather their ‘hick’ whiteness is illuminated when read alongside the cultured foreigner. Although ‘white trash’ implies most ‘trash’ is not white, and is therefore implicitly racist against people of colour, Anne’s terminology does not explicitly draw a link between ‘trash’ and race or ethnicity. However, ‘white trash’, ‘hick’ and suchlike mark white people by their class and their apparent failure to live up to middle-class values and ideals, and the notion of what white people should be. Brandon and Fariba relocate to run-down areas of poverty, crime, and fragmented families, where alcohol consumption and car racing are the primary recreational activi- ties and the brutish pairs who taunt and punish Brandon and Fariba, respectively, dis- play ‘white trash’ characteristics. John and Tom appear to be unemployed small-time criminals, while the men in Germany are unskilled factory workers, signalling the cou- pling of an uneducated underclass with negative stereotypes of small-town mentality displayed in both films. John wonders what Lana sees in Brandon, telling her ‘he’s kind of a wuss’ and Halberstam argues that Brandon’s masculinity, unlike the ‘white trash’ cis men in Falls City, is like that most often associated with ‘middle-class values of self-restraint and courteousness’ (2005, 65), despite his criminality. This courteous masculinity is certainly true with regard to educated, cultured Fariba/Siamak. Indeed, it is the outsider – a per- son of colour coupled with other forms of difference – who is educated and/or from a more desirable socio-economic location in both stories: queer Iranian Fariba in Unveiled and the murdered, disabled, black student located among a group of white unemployed people and factory workers, erased from Peirce’s translation of Brandon Teena’s story. Befitting of stereotypes of ‘white trash’ lives, it is criminality, alongside a violent queering of the romance genre that drives the plotline of both Boys Don’t Cry and Unveiled. Closer inspection, however, indicates that criminal acts are also frequently undertaken in relation to protagonists’ queerness: Fariba/Siamak disposes of a corpse, works illegally, commits fraud multiple times, steals a car, apparently in order to avoid persecution on the grounds of her sexuality. Likewise, Brandon commits fraud, as well as grand theft auto, before fleeing court dates that would register him both female and felon and possibly result in his incarceration, once again, in a cell for women. Indeed, this queerness, and/or ethnicity is portrayed as a reason for the passing protagonists’ behaviour in both films, without fully exploring what the ‘white trash’ cis men are scared of when Brandon and Siamak/Fariba enter their lives. Despite the passing protag- onists’ crimes and often questionable morals, they are repeatedly presented as likeable characters, for whom the viewer may have empathy due to the respective situations in which they find themselves. The precariousness of Fariba’s life in Iran was based on her practising homosexual- ity, but in Germany it is both nationality and the fear of deportation that is problematic, highlighted when s/he jumps into a factory vat when workers’ papers are being checked to ensure no ‘Schwarzarbeit’ (illegal work, literally translated as black work) is taking place. Brandon, on the other hand, is a legal citizen of the USA, who lives with the threat of expulsion and violence from natives in both his birth and adopted hometowns, communities to which he ostensibly belongs, due to his trans status. It is, however, Brandon’s criminal transgression that leads to the exposure of his biological sex and, although the locals frequently encourage lies and criminality when other outsiders, espe- cially the authorities, are the victims of Brandon’s behaviour, his gender transgression sees him lie to the homogenous group who had accepted him, despite his outsider sta- tus. This makes them unsure not only of Brandon, but also of their own strictly binary logic, for the spectrum of possibilities that Brandon opens up profoundly disturbs their self-understanding and we see layers of policing, power and authority come into play, both lawful and lawless. John and Tom’s use of the penis to regain control, via rape, does not work. Bran- don’s relationship with Lana remains intact and the couple form new plans, involving Brandon’s hometown. Unsure of Brandon’s past and confused by his present, the cis men determine Brandon’s future; John resorts to the gun, a phallic symbol par excel- lence, to assert his power, killing Brandon. In Unveiled, graffiti on the shower block of the holding centre declares ‘Kanaken ficken’, while Tom in Boys Don’t Cry undertakes graffiti (‘Eat me Lincoln Nb’), as a leisure activity to express his anger and frustration. ‘Kanaken’, a derogatory word used in Germany for immigrants, especially Turks, shows how sex (‘ficken’ = fuck) relates to violence, physical and linguistic. While Brandon Teena is no ‘Kanak’, his otherness means that he too must be fucked, feminised and rendered passive in order for white male locals to retain their dominance. The cis men in both films are, therefore, fixated on maintaining control. While white, cisgender, male authority figures, i.e. those subjects who are traditionally the most powerful, use the law and some of the aforementioned institutions and methods of discipline to control, the relatively powerless poor white men rely on the penis to try to reign supreme. While discussing the Brandon Teena archive, Halberstam declares American culture a ‘wound culture’ fascinated ‘with murder and mayhem’ (2005, 22), particularly in relation to gun crime. I would certainly add colonisation, slavery, and the aftermath, i.e. wounds from the US past, as well as 9/11 and narrative of the country as a prime target for terrorism, due to political policy and intervention overseas, to this. The notion of a Studies in European Cinema 221 222 Leanne Dawson ‘wound culture’ has, however, most frequently been used to theorise post-war Germany, a country affected by National Socialism, the Holocaust and the subsequent division and re-unification. It is certainly significant that both filmic tales of people with bodies assigned female at birth who are passing as men and who suffer brutality at the hands of cis men are set in countries so tightly bound up with horrific patriarchal violence and white dominance. These are countries where passing was employed by Black people, Jews, homosexuals and others, where success was a matter of life or death. Indeed violence is a continual threat during both films, repeatedly used to police gender, sexuality and nation. Reading both Boys Don’t Cry and Unveiled alongside each other allows the plurality of masculinity and the spectrum of sexuality beyond the strictly policed dyad to be highlighted, while showing that these independent films by lesbian directors have a strong bias towards the queer other. Heterosexual, white, biological male masculinity, the meeting of those parts of identity representing power, dominance and patriarchy, which are found on the first position of the binary, is represented as negative throughout both films. However, it is the juxtaposition of these markers of power with relative pov- erty that renders some characters’ behaviour truly abhorrent. Although both Tom and John, and Uwe and Andi, have aspects of identity that are considered powerful, they often feel powerless because of their socio-economic position, which also appears to mean they have not been socialised or educated to express themselves positively (boys don’t cry, especially not blue-collar or ‘white trash’ boys), resulting in excessive dis- plays of machismo. Furthermore, poverty is frequently linked to substance abuse and violence in both German and US culture, while a low socio-economic status can result in a lack of education and limited access to culture. So, in both films, it is not white, male masculinity that is demonised, but poor, white, male masculinity. While otherness, including trans identity, queerness and people of colour, is shown to be positive, both films adhere to tired stereotypes of small-town life and the poor. This ensures that at least one binary is firmly in place as viewers of these female-directed, queer, independent films are frequently assumed to belong to a certain demographic: an arthouse audience higher up the socio-economic ladder, cultured and educated. We are, perhaps, supposed to understand, even empathise with, the passing men’s crimes, while the poor cis men are presented as abhorrent with no room to understand the background to their horrendous transgressions. Character presentation appears to show the passing pro- tagonists, Brandon and Siamak/Fariba, the gentle (trans)man and the multilingual for- eigner, alienated by much of the ‘white trash’ behaviour of their surroundings but having to partake in some of this to fit into the community and survive. This presentation allows the viewer to prioritise Butlerian fantasy over biology and aesthetics in order to escape from the discomfort of aggressive, uncultured, ‘white trash’. Here, Foucauldian classifica- tion and measurement comes into play, for the arthouse viewer may take the distanced role, much like that of the psychoanalyst or the prison warden, of seeing and knowing (without disclosing), with both this and Halberstam’s ‘trans gaze’ unlike the types of suture and/or desire theorised by scholars working within Film Studies (Mulvey Neale (1993); Doane (2003); de Lauretis (1984); Stacey (1991) etc.). Although both narratives encourage the audience to take the side of the passing protagonists, alienated by the ‘white trash’ of their surroundings, it could be argued that Fariba survives not only because she is educated, but because her passing is presented as a means to an end, leading us to question if Brandon was punished onscreen not only for being trans, but also for his lack of educa- tion, and his socio-economic situation. Brandon, unlike Fariba, is trapped in a world of ‘white trash’ violence, as his temporal (pre-internet) and socio-economic (lack of tertiary education) position means his knowledge was limited, making a way out very difficult. Here, gender metamorphosis in terms of the spectrum is used as a metaphor for other kinds of im/mobility. So, it seems as if certain types of otherness are (temporarily) rendered more acceptable via the negative exploitation of other intersections of their identity also found in the second position of the dyad, including poverty, lack of education and limited access to (high) culture. If this is the case, then it is only ethical to ask whether arthouse entertainment is being sought at the expense of those – the poor, the ‘uncultured’ – for whom the independent cinema is often an inappropriate/unappropriated space, a theme I intend to investigate in future research on socio-economic position, queer culture, art-house cinema, and wellbe- ing. Those of us raised in relative poverty without a gateway to ‘high culture’ are taught we should not appropriate certain spaces as our dialects are out of place and, if class is read on the body, our white, or other, ‘trash’ may prevent us from passing, meaning we fail to fit in such spaces. While the LGB subject is becoming normalised (gay marriage, adoption, etc.), and trans rights are being fought for, class continues to be treated crimi- nally, for the poor continue to be demonised, onscreen and off, by those in a ‘higher’ socio-economic position. Although not considered as urgent, for it does not fulfil a biolog- ical needs, the art house cinema and other cultural venues are to class as the bathroom is to gender: a site of policing and potential anxiety for those who do not or cannot pass. I would issue a call to arms, but readers of an academic journal on European cinema are not the best audience. However, we, as academics, need to think about how we treat the poor not only in the films we watch and analyse or when considering Widening Par- ticipation for those less privileged, but also – particularly significant in these times of foregrounding knowledge exchange and impact – when we organise events and when we pick apart the lives of characters onscreen while seated alongside other privileged people in high culture venues or in academic journals to be read almost exclusively by the educated and cultured. We should, instead, look towards a heterotopia, which would signal political change, which may start with the fantasy of a world we can imagine as different. 